iThe Silencing of the SphinxiiiiiThe Silencing of the SphinxAdriaan van der WeelandRuud HisgenL E I D E Niv Kate NobbsFrans Duinfrom a series of four illustrations of Worstward Ho Not for sale Mostert & Van Onderen!vCONTENTSPreface. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . viiV : T G  S B’ WORSTWARD HO. . . . . . . . Contents Volume . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . V : I S B’ WORSTWARD HO. . . . . . . . Contents Volume . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Bibliography. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Index. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . viviiPREFACE[T]hey sat on as though turned to stone. Through the single window dawn shed no light.From the street no sound of reawakening. Or was it that buried in who knows what thoughtsthey paid no heed? To light of day. To sound of reawakening. (Ohio Impromptu, pp. –)And it’s the worst ....Isn’t that what you said?....The whisper....The odd word....Strainingto hear....Brain tired squeezing....It stops in the end....You stop it in the end.... (Eh Joe, p. )This is a two-volume study of Samuel Beckett’s late prose work Worstward Ho.Volume one is a work of textual scholarship, which aims to do two things. In theﬁrst place it presents the extant manuscript and typescript drafts of Worstward Hoand, on the basis of that documentary evidence, it discusses Beckett’s compositionalmethod and the genesis of the text. Secondly, it aims to establish a scholarly read-ing text of Worstward Ho. The second volume is a work of literary criticism, inwhich many of the interpretations that remain largely implicit in Volume  will beexplained and defended in greater detail.Though for the practical purpose of presenting this study as two doctoral dis-sertations we have contrived to divide the work, and the nominal authorship ofthe two resulting parts, in a sensible manner, it should be stressed that writing itwas a joint activity from beginning to end. Its beginnings go back to our sharedinterest in translating Anglo-Irish literature—a pursuit we took up during ourstudies at Trinity College, Dublin, in /, in a naive attempt to make up forat least some of the loss of our regular allowance from the Netherlands, occasionedby a six-month postal strike. Though as an “Anglo-Irish” writer (the term is dis-credited now) Beckett claimed our interest, we could not decide whether to takehim quite seriously, and it was not till the late s that we turned to his workagain. The main instigators of many of the translations that we went on to makewere actor and Beckett interpreter Lou Landré and the stage directors Jan vanWesterlaak and Erick Aufderheyde, who managed to give such dramatic life toour pallid versions of Beckett’s dead and dying words. Our rapidly growing fasci-nation with Beckett’s texts and increasing impatience with a long tradition ofhumourless interpretations of Beckett’s oeuvre convinced us that something sub-viiistantial had to be undertaken in order to change the persistent views of those benton doom and gloom. This something took the shape of the Samuel Beckett Fes-tival and the international symposium “Beckett in the s” which were held inApril  in The Hague, the Netherlands. It was this festival and conference,which we organised together with fellow board members of the Dutch SamuelBeckett Foundation, Marius Buning, Matthijs Engelberts and Sander Blom, andfestival director Ton van de Langkruis, which inspired us to “go where neverbefore” in our exploration of Beckett’s language. In the wake of the Festival wedecided to channel our scattered activities (which had also led to some essays inDutch and English in magazines and books, and to an anthology of Beckett’s workin Dutch translation) into a more sustained eﬀort, within the framework of adoctoral dissertation. Instead of merely rewriting our earlier eﬀorts, we decided tofocus on a new subject, in the shape of the one book we had come to admire mostof all: Worstward Ho—a book that we were hoping one day to attempt to translate.Over the ﬁve years that we worked discontinuously on this study we were ableto draw on the knowledge and expertise of many people. It is a pleasure to be ableto thank them here. Among the many translators and scholars who kept whettingour intellectual razors were Enoch Brater, Eric Burgers, Gerry Dukes, Stan Gon-tarski, Magnus Hedlund, Hans Hildebrandt, Marek Kedzierski, Shimon Levy,Antoni Libera, Breon Mitchell, Gerhard Jan Nauta, Antonia Rodríguez–Gago,Erika Tophoven, Güven Turan, Tjebbe Westendorp, many of whom also pro-vided such stimulating company at the Beckett translation workshops in The Hague(), Arles (), Norwich () and Berlin (), the Samuel Beckett Sum-mer School () and the international symposium “Samuel Beckett: Crossroadsand Borderlines/L’oeuvre carrefour et l’oeuvre limite” (). On our visits to theSamuel Beckett Archives in Reading Jim Knowlson, John Pilling, Mary Bryden,Michael Bott and Julian Garforth always provided a stimulating and welcomingworking environment among the piles and boxes. In Dublin Professor BrendanKennelly (our mentor at Trinity College in /) kept our Irish connectionsalive and was helpful in more than academic ways. In Austin, Texas, the staﬀ ofthe Harry Ransom Humanities Research Center was helpful far beyond the call ofduty; Linda Ashton, Keeper of the French collection, generously gave much ofher time to make her foreign visitor at home among the Center’s rich resources,and was pivotal in procuring permission to reproduce the texts of “Ceiling” andPREFACEix“The Way” in full. Professor Charles Krance, series editor of the Garland bilingualvariorum editions of Beckett’s works, kindly invited us to prepare an edition ofWorstward Ho for the series. André Derval and John Calder went to great lengthsto locate and make available from the uncatalogued Calder archives in the posses-sion of  in Paris many documents relevant to the publication history ofWorstward Ho, including, most importantly, the typescript that served as publish-er’s copy for the British edition, which provided the long-missing link betweenthe printed text and the Reading typescript. Our special thanks go to EdwardBeckett and John Calder, who never appeared to grow tired of answering ques-tions. We are indebted to the Samuel Beckett Estate; Jérôme Lindon, BarneyRosset and John Calder; the Beckett International Foundation and the HarryRansom Humanities Research Center for permission to use published and un-published material from Beckett’s writings.Especially we would like to thank our families for the time that we stole fromthem and the support that we extorted, and our parents for their blind faith.PREFACExThe Silencing of the Sphinx

Volume i

The Genesis of Samuel Beckett’s Worstward Ho

1

[Frontispiece 1]

2

The Genesis of Samuel Beckett’s

Worstward Ho

Proefschrift

ter verkrijging van de graad van Doctor

aan de Universiteit Leiden,

op gezag van de Rector Magniﬁcus, Dr W.A. Wagenaar,
hoogleraar in de Faculteit der Sociale Wetenschappen,

volgens besluit van het College voor Promoties
te verdedigen op woensdag 9 december 1998

te klokke 15.15 uur

door

Adriaan van der Weel

geboren te Rotterdam in 1953

Universiteit Leiden

1998

3

Promotor:
Referent:
Promotiecommissie:

Professor Dr. Th.L. D’haen
Professor J. Pilling, University of Reading (G.B.)
Professor Dr. B. Westerweel
Professor Dr. A.G.H. Anbeek van der Meyden
Professor G. Lernout, Universiteit Antwerpen (België)

4

CONTENTS

Abbreviations Used . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
List of Diagrams . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
List of Figures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
The Evolution of the Text. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
Publication History . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  26
Objective and Method of the Edition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  39
Notes to the Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  71
The Text . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  77
Headnote to the Transliterations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  77
Worstward Ho . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  79
Appendix 1: “The Way”, “Ceiling”, “Sottisier” RUL MS 2901 . . . . . . . . . .  291
“The Way” . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  301
“Ceiling” . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  313
“Sottisier” RUL MS 2901 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  339
Appendix 2: Typography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  345
Appendix 3: RUL MS 2602, f. 18v
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  353

5

He took his article from a steel ﬁle:
“It’s accurate. I have not changed her style.
There’s one misprint—not that it matters much:
Mountain, not fountain. The majestic touch.”

(Vladimir Nabokov, Pale Fire)

ABBREVIATIONS USED
CP

Collected Poems, London, Calder

CSPlays

CSProse

Dream

HRHRC

JOBS

RUL

Collected Shorter Plays, London, Faber
Collected Shorter Prose, London, Calder, 1984
Dream of Fair to Middling Women, Dublin, 1992
Harry Ransom Humanities Research Center, University of Texas, Austin

Journal of Beckett Studies

Reading University Library

LIST OF DIAGRAMS
1. A comparison of the copy-text of Worstward Ho with the published editions . . . . . . . . . . .  66-67
2. A comparison of the unpublished drafts of Worstward Ho . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  67-68

LIST OF FIGURES
1. Diagrams for Quad drawn on RUL MS 2602 f. 18v

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3 5 4

6

INTRODUCTION

In the course of the history of print technology the nature of textual corruption in
the transmission of the written word reﬂects the changing technology. The nature
of the errors may have changed, but the tendency towards textual corruption is as
great as it ever was. In this age of technological sophistication corruptions rarely
result from the printing process itself, but the route from the author’s copy to
book still oﬀers ample opportunities for textual problems to arise: in author–pub-
lisher relations, editorial procedure, and typesetting.

Beckett’s work has naturally suﬀered its share of textual problems caused during
these stages in the production process. They have been complicated further by the
existence of two independent English language editions, a British and an Ameri-
can one. Fortunately, in Beckett’s case the textual records are unusually rich. Manu-
scripts and typescripts of almost all of Beckett’s works are known to exist, and
almost  all  of  them  are  available  for  inspection  in  public  repositories.  This  rich
collection of documentary sources oﬀers abundant help to set the textual record
straight,  at  the  same  time  as  it  allows  a  fascinating  view  of  Beckett’s  working
method.

Despite  the  acknowledged  inaccuracy  of  many  of  the  existing  editions  of
Beckett’s work,1 scholarly critical text editions remain rare. There are numerous
editions of the most popular plays intended for educational use, but they rarely
raise textual matters at all.2 The textual notes in these and similar editions (for
example, John Fletcher’s edition of Fin de partie of 1970) are mostly limited to
occasional  references  to  manuscript  evidence  to  aid  interpretation  or  provide
intertextual glosses.

Speciﬁcally useful for future stage productions, as well as being of more general
scholarly  interest,  are  the  volumes  in  The  Theatrical  Notebooks  of  Samuel  Beckett
series, which include revised texts of the plays based on a previous printed edition,
and implementing later cuts and changes made by Beckett for productions he was
involved in. Some attention to textual issues, especially those resulting from vari-
ant readings in the US and UK editions, has been devoted to the shorter prose by
S.E. Gontarski in his edition of The Complete Short Prose 1929–1989.3 But other-

7

VOLUME 1

wise, few eﬀorts of textual criticism have been lavished on Beckett’s oeuvre. Sur-
prisingly, even the ambitious series of bilingual variorum editions published under
the general editorship of Charles Krance does not aim to establish a critical text.
It is certainly true that the nature of the problems and the resulting degree of
textual “corruption” of Beckett’s work are hardly comparable to those encoun-
tered in some of the better-known cases of twentieth-century textual instability.
The  most  famous  instance  of  the  latter  is  no  doubt  James  Joyce’s  Ulysses.  Its
compositional and publication history is too well known to need reiteration. But
one small detail from the many complications in the transmission of Joyce’s oeuvre
is not only instructive but also apt, since Beckett himself is supposed to have been
implicated in it. This is the well-known anecdote about Beckett’s involvement in
the composition of Joyce’s Finnegans Wake. Beckett was taking down Joyce’s dic-
tation, when Joyce answered a knock on the door with the words “Come in”,
which Beckett faithfully wrote down. Joyce, hearing Beckett reading the passage
back to him, expressed surprise at the phrase “Come in”, but on Beckett insisting
that that was what Joyce had said, he was happy to let it stand.4 As James Knowlson
remarks,  scholars  have  been  hard  put  to  locate  the  passage  in  Finnegans  Wake.
Whether apocryphal or not, the point of the anecdote is that it was related to
Joyce’s biographer by Beckett himself, and that it expresses what Beckett regarded
as typical of Joyce’s method and attitude. Beckett pointed out on various occa-
sions that where Joyce aspired to all-inclusive richness, he himself embraced ex-
clusion and poverty. The deliberateness with which he turned his back on Joyce’s
attitude to writing after 1946 has been well documented.5

Such an attitude as the one just illustrated might just be conceivable on Beckett’s
part at the time of his composition of Murphy, which is Joycean in, among other
aspects, its happy exploitation of the banality of everyday life. But it is unthinkable
in the increasingly minimalist post-trilogy Beckett. Without minimizing in any
way the extent and signiﬁcance of the problems of textual transmission in Ulysses
and Finnegans Wake it may be argued that the textual corruption in Beckett’s case,
even if incomparably more limited in extent, is, in view of Beckett’s minimalist
concern, at least as intrusive as in the case of a writer like James Joyce.

The textual problems in Beckett’s work can be usefully placed into two main
categories. The ﬁrst category covers the problems attributable in one way or an-
other  to  Beckett  himself.  The  most  signiﬁcant  contribution  to  this  category  is

8

INTRODUCTION

made by variant readings between the UK and US texts, which are caused by the
fact  that  the  two  publication  processes  usually  occurred  quite  separately,  often
even at diﬀerent times.6 The second category is covered by the blanket expression
of “printing errors”. These may derive from typesetting errors followed by sloppy
in-house proofreading, or from ill-advised editorial correction. Beckett’s contri-
bution to this category consists in not spotting errors originating in editorial pro-
cedures or typesetting in the course of his own proofreading.

Whatever  their  origin,  the  textual  corruptions  in  Beckett’s  work  frequently
lead to signiﬁcant changes in meaning. The shorter and more condensed the text
in which they occur, the more potentially damaging they are. Gerry Dukes has
been  collecting  textual  variants  and  misprints  in  the  Beckett  oeuvre  for  some
years, and the following example comes from his collection. In the ﬁrst, limited,
edition of Stirrings Still this sentence occurs:

Of their whenceabouts that is of clock and cries the same was true that is no
more to be determined now than as was only natural then. (Stirrings Still, Lon-
don, Calder, and New York, Blue Moon Books, 1989, [unpaginated; on the
third page of part 2])

In the ﬁrst trade edition, printed in As the Story Was Told, London, Calder, 1991,
the sentence appears as:

Of their whereabouts that is of clock and cries the same was true that is no more
to be determined now than as was only natural then. (p. 122; italics added)

“Whenceabouts”  is  a  typical  Beckett  coinage,  but  apparently  the  editor  of  the
Calder edition amended it to the more usual English “whereabouts”.7

Many signiﬁcant textual problems in Beckett’s texts come to light as a result of
a comparison between the US and UK editions. For example, in a discussion of the
drafts of Come and Go, Rosemary Pountney observes that insertions in one of the
typescripts of the play “are not present in the Calder and Boyars [UK] text of 1967,
while  the  Grove  Press  [US]  version  of 1968  (Cascando  and  Other  Short  Dramatic
Pieces) incorporates only the additional dialogue at the opening of the play and not
the extra words at its close”.8

9

VOLUME 1

But not all textual cruxes are shown up by a straightforward comparison be-
tween the UK and US printed editions. In both the US and UK editions of Company
“philogenitiveness” (paragraph 51) should read “philoprogenitiveness”.9 Beckett
originally wrote “philoprogenitiveness” in the manuscript (RUL  MS 1822) and ﬁrst
typescript  (Boston  College  John  J.  Burns  Library,  ts  I),10  but  according  to  the
variants Charles Krance lists in his variorum edition of Company (p. 99), the later
sources all have “philogenitiveness”. It would appear, in other words, that Beckett
himself introduced the misreading, which was not detected during the usual edi-
torial checking process. The example illustrates the importance of checking the
wealth  of  documentary  sources  for  establishing  deﬁnitive  readings  of  Beckett’s
works. Whereas the present error could be recognised by the fact that “philo-
genitiveness” is not an English word (it may have been caused by a contamination
with “phylogenesis”), other errors may be considerably harder to spot, especially
if there is no apparent reason to doubt the printed reading.

The present edition of Worstward Ho aims to establish a deﬁnitive reading text,
ironing out what errors have crept in during the ordinary course of textual trans-
mission, both in the form of discepancies between the UK and US editions and
between Beckett’s typescript and the printed editions.

It  was  suggested  above  that  in  general  Beckett’s  minimalism  in  the  postwar
works magniﬁes the eﬀects of errors. But there are reasons why Worstward Ho,
more than most of Beckett’s books, deserves the utmost editorial care to avoid—
or, in the event, to correct—misspellings, misleading typography, etc. Worstward
Ho is an unusual literary text, even by the standards set by Beckett’s own work. It
is very short, and enigmatic—inaccessible even, with its unconventional vocabu-
lary, its dense texture of repetition, its verse-like prosody, its fragmented typo-
graphical appearance and its haunting musicality. Indeed, its musicality is the clue
to what is probably one of the more accessible approaches to the text. Its rhythm
and the incantatory nature of most of the text invite regarding Worstward Ho as a
sort of “soundscape”. Yet, however much pleasure might be derived from the
book regarded as a soundscape, or metaphysical poetry, such an attitude ultimately
fails to satisfy the enquiring mind which, having once got a whiﬀ of meaning, will
seize upon the words “to make what sad sense of it may”.11 On an intellectual
level Worstward Ho is a diﬃcult text; it requires a great deal of patience and perse-
verance. Readers who need repeated readings to even begin to make sense of the

10

INTRODUCTION

text cannot easily correct misinformation caused by textual corruption. The vo-
cabulary  is  unconventional  and  highly  repetitive,  creating  a  texture  of  internal
echoes so dense as to render the text almost inscrutable. Worstward Ho is the most
hermetic of Beckett’s works, and presents the reader with many questions about
the nature of the book and how it should be read. A number of readings will be
suggested in Volume 2. But though its primary focus is textual, the present vol-
ume, too, has its contribution to make to a better understanding of Worstward Ho.
Establishing the deﬁnitive text of Worstward Ho is one aim of the present study;
to present an evolutionary variorum edition is another. The preservation of Beckett’s
manuscripts and typescripts allows the compositional process of Worstward Ho to
be reconstructed in detail, through a draft-by-draft analysis. The chief concerns of
the  present  volume  are  to  chart  the  text’s  evolution  through  all  of  the  extant
drafts. Collation of the manuscripts, typescripts and published texts furnishes some
interesting  insights  into  Beckett’s  compositional  method,  and  by  solving  some
textual cruxes it provides evidence towards a deﬁnitive edition of Worstward Ho’s
text. But a comparison of the various drafts also throws shafts of light on some of
the obscurer passages in the work, and thus contributes towards a better under-
standing of the published text of Worstward Ho. Consultation of manuscript B, to
give one example, shows that “same” in “Stare away to child and worsen same”
(89) does not paraphrase as “focus the stare on the child and worsen it”, but as
“focus the stare on the child and worsen it [the child] in the same way”. In addi-
tion, the synoptic presentation of the manuscripts and typescripts in parallel tran-
scriptions allows the reader to pursue any literary and linguistic interests of his
own.

Preceding the conventional variorum text edition, a critical essay on the gen-
esis of Worstward Ho will look at the development of the text through its various
drafts, illustrating the sort of use that may be made of the information presented by
a variorum text edition of Beckett’s work. This essay is followed by an account of
the publication history of Worstward Ho.

The variorum text edition itself is introduced by an essay outlining the edi-
tion’s objectives and the methods used in presenting the textual evidence. If that
discussion seems at times rather more elaborate than might be necessary, it is hoped
that it will be regarded as somewhat more than an academic exercise, and that it
may be regarded as an illustration of the need to apply a proper measure of com-

11

VOLUME 1

mon sense as well as literary criticism to textual scholarship. Textual scholarship is
more than the limited view an earlier generation of bibliographers took of it: the
study of black marks on paper. The frequent use of the word text in what follows
is unavoidable, but it should not be allowed to obscure that Worstward Ho is a
work of literature. As a work of literature, Worstward Ho  is of an infinitely wider
scope than the brevity of its text may perhaps suggest.

12

THE EVOLUTION OF THE TEXT
Editions in English of Beckett’s novellas “The Expelled” and “The End” carry the
credit “Translated by Richard Seaver in collaboration with the author”. Seaver
has published an account of the nature of this collaboration with Beckett concern-
ing the translation of “The End”:

The opening passage ... went, in my translation:

They dressed me and gave me money. I knew what the money was to be
used for, it was for my travelling expenses. When it was gone, they said, I
would have to get some more, if I wanted to go on travelling.

“What  do  you  think  of  the  word  clothed,”  Beckett  said,  “instead  of dressed?
‘They clothed me and gave me money.’ Do you like the ring of it better?”

Yes, clearly: clothed was the better word.
“In the next sentence,” he said, “you’re literally right. In French I spelled it
out, said ‘traveling expenses’ all right. But maybe we can make it a bit tighter
here, just say something like, ‘It was to get me going’ or ‘It was to get me
started’. Do you like either of them at all?”

On we went, phrase by phrase, Beckett praising my translation as prelude to
shaping it to what he really wanted, reworking here a word, there a whole
sentence, chipping away, tightening, shortening, always ﬁnding the better word
if one existed, exchanging the ordinary for the poetic, until the work sang.
Never, I am sure, to his satisfaction, but certainly to my ear. Under Beckett’s
tireless wand that opening passage soon became:

They clothed me and gave me money. I knew what the money was for, it

12

INTRODUCTION

was  to  get  me  started.  When  it  was  gone  I  would  have  to  get  more,  if  I
wanted to go on.13

Seaver’s anecdotal account illustrates well to what extraordinary sharpness Beckett
had honed his sensitivity to the meaning and overtones of words. By far the greater
part of the revision process of Worstward Ho consists of the same patient chiselling
of words and phrases on paper, in a text whose lineaments had already taken ﬁrm
shape in Beckett’s head.

Examples of the process of verbal ﬁne-tuning abound, and may easily be found
by comparing the parallel texts presented in this edition. But though fascinating in
themselves, these are of course in no way typical of Worstward Ho. Comparison of
the manuscripts and typescripts with the printed text of any of Beckett’s other
works will show a similar meticulous care taken with the minutest details. This
discussion intends primarily to examine another aspect of the evolution of Worstward
Ho, which is the way in which successive versions of the text increasingly move
away  from  a  representational  mode.  This  can  be  observed  most  clearly  in  the
removal of a number of narrative elements that may be termed, in the words of
the text, “all of old”, such as the presence of a listener and the description of his
physical location. The chapter will then look brieﬂy at some of the more narrowly
linguistic changes observable in the text’s evolution, especially where these con-
tribute to the sense of alienation resulting from the removal of representational
detail. (A more in-depth analysis of Beckett’s use of language in Worstward Ho is
given in Volume 2, Chapter 2, “Language”.)

Before looking at the text itself, it is worth looking at the genesis of the title.
The manuscript bears the title in capitals and underlined in Beckett’s own hand.
But its ﬁrmness and the central position at the top centre of the ﬁrst page may be
misleading. On closer inspection, the title is written in a diﬀerent medium, or at
least in a slightly lighter shade of ink, than the rest of the page, and it seems likely
that it was added at a later date, not an unusual situation in Beckett’s case. But if
the title was added later, the question is when. The possible span of time is wide:
from any stage during the writing of the manuscript to a date even after the book
was  published,  for  example  when  Beckett  donated  the  manuscript  to  Reading
University  Library.  The  typescripts  do  not  oﬀer  much  help  in  establishing  the
moment: all three are untitled. But if the absence of the title from the typescripts

13

VOLUME 1

suggest anything, it might be that Beckett had still not decided on one when he
typed them. The hypothesis that Beckett came to decide on the title at a very late
date is supported by at least one piece of circumstantial evidence. When Beckett
had handed the ﬁnal typescript (E) to John Calder, Calder wrote back that he was
“very happy about WORSTWARD HO!”. The error of the added exclamation mark
might  indicate  that  Beckett  had  still  not  written  down  the  title  when  he  gave
Calder the text at La Palette in Paris. Certainly it was not on the typescript itself
(see the description of the typescripts below).

There is one point in the genesis of the text where Beckett makes an emenda-
tion which creates a direct reference to the title. This occurs in D64.1, where
Beckett changes “So leastward on” into “So leastward ho”.  Though this is admit-
tedly no less speculative than the idea that Beckett waited until after he had sub-
mitted his work to his publisher before committing the title Worstward Ho to paper
(and the two speculations do not necessarily reinforce each other), the suggestion
is strong that it was at this point that Beckett ﬁrst thought of “Worstward Ho” as
a possible title.

As  far  as  the  evolution  of  the  text  itself  is  concerned,  the  ﬁrst  evidence  of
substantial  revision  in  the  process  of  composition  of  Worstward  Ho  is  Beckett’s
abandonment of the ﬁrst manuscript draft (A) after some four pages. The corres-
ponding  section  of  the  second  draft  (B)  shows  barely  any  corrections,  and  ap-
proaches the published text much more closely than it resembles the ﬁrst draft.
The handwriting of the revision is much more even, showing greater conﬁdence.
The most obvious change involved in the revision, and a radical one, is the exci-
sion of the presence, so familiar in Beckett’s oeuvre, of a listener, causing the text to
veer away from the concerns of so many of Beckett’s earlier texts—most promi-
nently Company, in which a listener looms especially large. Whatever Beckett’s
motives for removing the listener, it amounts to the conscious elimination of a
discrete element representing one of Beckett’s recurring themes. This excision
forms a conscious break with “all of old”.

Both the supine listener and much of his physical environment, notably the
ceiling, are in fact prominent in the short prose text “Ceiling”, written for Avigdor
Arikha, and dated 10 and 26 July 1981, a mere fortnight before Beckett began his
ﬁrst draft of Worstward Ho, on 9 August.14 Beside the fact that the ceiling in the ﬁrst
draft  of  Worstward  Ho  may  thus  well  have  been  a  legacy  from  the  text  which

14

INTRODUCTION

Beckett  completed  immediately  prior  to  Worstward  Ho  there  are  various  other
reasons for regarding “Ceiling” as closely linked to Worstward Ho. Thematically
the texts share the concern with reduction in the development of the text: each
subsequent paragraph is shorter in “Ceiling”; in Worstward Ho the narrator breaks
down his repertoire of language and attempts to reduce the subject of his narration
to nothingness. Even on the lexical and syntactical level certain similarities are
obvious at a glance. “Dull white”—which was originally “dim white” in the ﬁrst
draft of “Ceiling”—echoes the “dim white” of Worstward Ho (e.g., 26.9, 53.7),
“No knowledge of where gone from” echoes “Dim light source unknown” (e.g.,
8.1,  47.1),  and  “Somewhere  again.  Somehow  again.  Someone  again”  echoes
“Somewhose somewhere somehow still” (57.3). In both texts the verbal reduc-
tion strains the syntax to the extreme. But the most signiﬁcant correspondence is
of course in the way that Worstward Ho as it were simply continues from “Ceil-
ing”. “Being” in both texts takes the familiar form of a place, a body and a way on.
But while in “Ceiling” there is no intimation that this “Somewhere again. Some-
how again. Someone again” might come to an end, Worstward Ho ﬁnally oﬀers an
end to the wearying “on” when it reaches the liberating “nohow on”.

Along with the listener himself all reference both to listening and to its corol-
lary, the presence of sound, is deleted as well. And so the narrator, still “Muttering
it all to himself as it comes” in manuscript A (A6, A7), also falls silent:

The  supine  one.  Too  much.  Gone.  No  mutter.  No  listener.  Gone.  ...  The
whole dead still. (A21)

In  manuscript  A  the  movement  from  speech  to  silence  is  part  of  the  narrative
development itself, but in manuscript B the silence is simply a given fact. From
manuscript B on there is no indication that the reader is invited in any way to
imagine hearing the narrator speak. The eﬀect is that the reader is unsure whether
the words he reads are meant to be spoken, thought or indeed—since author and
narrator are so inextricably intertwined—written. This merging of speaker and
listener  in  Worstward  Ho  would  appear  to  bring  Beckett  close  to  resolving  the
identity crisis he spoke of in a conversation with Charles Juliet dated 14 Novem-
ber 1975: “In the end, you don’t know who is speaking any more. The subject
disappears completely. That’s the end result of the identity crisis”.15

15

VOLUME 1

Outside of the narrative voice, whose auditory status remains unresolved,16 the
only reference to sound that occurs in any of the drafts is a potential sound only,
presented as the body’s only alternative to standing up to relieve the pain it feels.
Though mooted as an option, it is quickly dismissed:

No choice but stand. Somehow up and stand. Somehow stand. That or groan.
The groan so long on its way. No. No groan. Simply pain. Simply up. (9.1–9)

For  “groan”  manuscript  A  has  “scream”;  typescript  C  has  “shriek”,  and  from
typescript D Beckett settles on “groan”; manuscript B lacks even this one refer-
ence to sound altogether. This leaves the text entirely silent, apart from, possibly,
the narrative voice.

Another element deleted from manuscript A is the explicit statement about the
non-corporeal nature of the characters in the narrative. Again it is the narrator
himself who provides the clue. The last words of manuscript A are:

Shadows of bodies gone. Bodies once. Bodies gone. Shadows still. (A30a)

This overt reference to the characters’ non-corporeal nature does not survive the
ﬁrst draft. The word “body” is left ambivalent in all further drafts up to and in-
cluding the ﬁnal text.

In the same vein, Beckett is obviously concerned not to be too explicit about
the physical circumstances of his characters. B76i has a reference to a situation
“On earth at rest one sundown once alive”, but as an obvious invitation to think
of the narrative time and place as situated after death Beckett probably equally
judged this too speciﬁc: it is deleted from subsequent drafts, leaving all interpreta-
tions open.17

After manuscript A is abandoned and the text, so to speak, ﬁnds its feet, the
qualitative  extent  of  Beckett’s  changes  in  the  compositional  process  is  limited.
There is only one exception—when in manuscript B a similar situation develops
to the one that resulted in the deletion of ceiling and listener from manuscript A.
In manuscript B Beckett writes about the “sundown of a sunless day”, when “the
earth stood still”. The passage runs to ﬁve paragraphs in the manuscript, which are
reduced to two (75–76) in the ﬁnal version. The handwriting in B75 is unusually

16

INTRODUCTION

diﬃcult to decipher at this point; it is not inconceivable that there is a connection
between  the  forced  handwriting  and  Beckett’s  uncertainty  about  what  he  was
writing at this point. These references to what sounds like a memory are com-
posed with much revision even in manuscript B, but the revision continues in
typescript C. They survive the ﬁrst typewritten version, and are then rigourously
deleted, with the result that in the ﬁnal version of the text the passage is reduced to
a fraction of its original length.

The ﬁrst draft of B76 (B76i) opens with the phrase “No once in pastless now”,
which remains the unchanging point of departure for the discussion of time in 76
throughout all drafts and in the ﬁnal text. Again in all versions of the text the
statement is immediately negated: “No not (quite) none.” It is the explanation of
the reason for this negation which radically changes from manuscript B to type-
script  D.  Manuscript  B  at  this  point  mentions  both  the  “close  of  sunless  day”
(which ﬁrst occurred in B75) and the “crippled hands” as proof of the occurrence
of time. Since one refers to a memory or past event outside of the present narrative,
while the other refers to an earlier occurrence within the narrative, the narrator
concludes that there are two onces: “One once now one once then.” To compli-
cate matters even further, the next paragraph moots the possibility of there exist-
ing what appears to be yet a third “once”:

Back better worse to say the so-said void too still as ﬁrst said for short. There
too to forge some once. Some new once for now. (B76a.0-0b)

This state of aﬀairs is too confusing even for the narrator, who decides to

Resay as ﬁrst best worse said.  No new once there for now.  Nothing there ever
that was not always. (B76b.0a-0c)

Typescript C gives a slightly reworked version of essentially the same narrative
development, but in typescript D the matter of time is greatly simpliﬁed when, by
removing the “sundown of sunless day”, Beckett removes all reference to the real
world and real-world time from 75 and 76. The only kind of time remaining is
now the narrative’s own time: the time required for the narrative to proceed, and
so “once” can only refer to an earlier stage in the narrative development.

17

VOLUME 1

The  removal  of  the  reference  to  time  in  the  real  world  contributes  to  the
conscious  creation  of  a  completely  self-contained  universe  in  Worstward  Ho.  It
may be observed, though, that the idea of the earth standing still (i.e., time stop-
ping) can also be found in Ill Seen Ill Said (“Throughout this confrontation the sun
stands  still.  That  is  to  say  the  earth.”)  and  in  the  brief  unpublished  text  “The
Way”18 (“Low in the west or east the sun standstill. As if the earth at rest.). This
may suggest that, as in the case of the deletion of the listener from manuscript A,
a situation developed where an “alien” element (in this case a concern from Ill
Seen Ill Said and “The Way”) intruded into the narrative. If such was indeed the
case, the resulting compositional impasse was broken by the excision of the oﬀending
passages. At the same time, it may be argued that these and other phrases are part
of Beckett’s stock in trade, the hoard of words and ideas from which his texts must
always be formed or, at least, the hoard of words and ideas current in his mind at
the  time  of  writing.  It  is  interesting  in  this  respect  to  note  that  “sundown  of
sunless day” resembles the iterative phrase “close of a long day” in Rockaby. Like
“Ceiling” and “The Way”, Rockaby, too, was written at the same time as Worstward
Ho, in 1981 (and also in English), suggesting that, as in the case of the ceiling, the
phrase may have originated from Beckett’s thesaurus at the time.

What the removal of the listener from manuscript A and the simpliﬁcation of
the time issue in manuscript B have in common is that in both cases the narrative
itself preﬁgures the authorial decision. The two deletions thus form an example of
one of the most striking observations from a comparison of the drafts, i.e., the
extent to which the narrative voice and authorial composition coincide. In the
time example in typescript C, the narrator’s speculation about the possibility of a
“once” existing in the void is answered by “no”. The condensed version of the
passage in typescript D takes its cue, as it were, from that “no”, and leaves out the
speculation altogether. In this way the narrative frequently describes the compos-
itional process itself (or, vice versa, one might say that the compositional process is
frequently the subject of the composition). The narrative presents, in other words,
a residuum of an earlier, more elaborate, version which author and narrator have
collaboratively condensed.19

The frequent comment “too much” made in manuscript B and typescript C by
the narrator about the amount of detail in his own narration is another case in
point. Subsequent changes show Beckett in most cases to have acted upon his

18

INTRODUCTION

narrator’s remarks, either at once or in subsequent drafts. In other words, they
frequently turn out to be performative utterances. In manuscript A, for example:

No  detail  above  all.  Fatal.  Such  as  water-mattress.  Any  mattress  too  much.
Simply supine. (A8.0–0d)

The  phrase  “too  much”,  which  is  to  be  understood  as  elliptic  for  “too  much
detail”, is the ﬁrst of ten such urgings by the narrator to apply constraint in the
provision of conventional narrative detail, most of them subsequently acted upon.
The water-mattress, described as a “fatal” detail, is a case in point: it does not
feature in manuscript B. Similarly, when in typescript C the nightlight from the
abandoned manuscript A is reintroduced (C8), again accompanied by the qualiﬁ-
cation  “too  much”,  it  is  deleted  again  from  typescript  D.  In  B49  the  narrator
mentions examples of the sort of detail he will not add to the cast of shades he has
created. In subsequent drafts these examples are omitted. The author acting in this
way on his own narrator’s injunctions, is an unmistakable indication of the extent
to which narrator and author coincide in Worstward Ho (as indeed we know they
do in many of Beckett’s prose texts).

In  a  number  of  cases,  however,  Beckett  is  content  to  retain  the  saying  that
something is not, drawing attention to the very process of, to use Worstward Ho’s
own  vocabulary,  “worsening”.  In  such  cases  the  reader  sees  in  his  mind’s  eye
precisely that which he is told explicitly is not the case.20

A  phenomenon  in  the  revision  process  worth  noting  is  the  deletion  of  the
nightlight from one draft (B8) and its subsequent reappearance in the next (C8).
Frequently, words and phrases are changed or deleted from one draft to the next,
but reinstated in a subsequent draft. For example, “puke” in A becomes “throw
up” in B and C, “puke” again in D, ﬁnally to become “throw up” again, and in
39.29 “On unseen knees” is ﬁrst deleted in manuscript B, to return again in type-
script D. Though in the absence of conclusive evidence this must remain conjec-
tural, there is a strong suggestion that Beckett composed the text from words and
phrases that rang in his head—”Muttering it all to himself as it comes” (A6), as the
narrator  himself  has  it—and  to  which  time  and  again  he  returns  involuntarily.
This is also suggested by the evidence of the layout of the notebook in which
manuscript  A  and  the  manuscript  B  holograph  were  written  down.  Often  the

19

VOLUME 1

notes on the left-hand page contain the kernel of a complete paragraph, and more
often than not the phrases jotted down on the left recur on the right verbatim. This
(and the fact that in almost all cases the notes that have been used on the right are
crossed out, while unused text is left undeleted) suggests that these phrases guided
the compositional process. That phrases jotted down on the left-hand page can
usually be found verbatim, not only in the main text of manuscript B but also in the
ﬁnal text, also suggests that it is the literal phrases rather than ideas or concepts
they embody that directed the primary act of composition, that is to say, before
revision. These observations recall that, with Proust, Bram van Velde, and Jung,
Beckett regarded “the work of art as neither created nor chosen, but discovered,
uncovered, excavated, pre-existing within the artist, a law of his nature” (Proust,
p. 84).

The two instances of radical revision in the course of the text’s evolution dis-
cussed so far (the excision of the listener from manuscript A and of the “sundown
of a sunless day” from typescript C) belong to a larger overall category of revision:
the deletion of conventional narrative detail referring to a recognisable real world.
Though individually often small changes, they add up to a sizeable body, with a
signiﬁcant eﬀect on the nature of the text.

The removal of the listener results in uncertainty about the status of the narra-
tive voice. Since the listener does not return at all in subsequent drafts, the narra-
tive detail associated with him goes too. But in other places Beckett sets about
consistently  removing  the  same  sort  of  detail,  most  of  it  representational,  fre-
quently as it were acting on decisions made by the narrator himself in the previous
draft. Examples of such deliberate removal of representational detail, not explicitly
announced by the narrator, are the deletion of references to the physical setting of
the action, like “the mud” (reminiscent of How It Is), the “ﬂoor or whatever it is
hard as iron”, and so on. With the deletion from subsequent drafts of “middle
distance” (B25) and “foreground” (B26), any references even to a more generic
three-dimensional  space  have  also  gone.  This  results  in  the  reader  increasingly
losing his spatial bearings.

This removal of representational detail linking the text to the real world could
be said to occur largely on the narrative level, aﬀecting setting and plot. But the
process has its counterpart on a more narrowly linguistic level, and it is interesting
to see how the linguistic form contributes to the same eﬀect of alienation. The

20

INTRODUCTION

most obvious observation here is that, just as connections between the text and
the real world are severed by the deletion of relevant descriptive detail, the general
tendency in Beckett’s linguistic usage in Worstward Ho is towards making syntactic
and semantic relationships between words less explicit.

A comparison of half a paragraph from manuscript A with the ﬁnal version in
typescript E will provide ample illustration of Beckett’s inclination toward making
the syntax (already unconventional) more diﬀuse.

It stands. What? Yes. Stands. Had to get up in the end & stand. Yes. Nothing
for it in the mud but get up & stand. The bones. The ground or ﬂoor whatever
it is hard as iron. No mind & pain? Say yes for the bones to pain till it has to
stand. But up somehow & stand. Or just enough. Say just enough mind for
pain.  (A6)

It stands. What? Yes. Say it stands. Had to up in the end and stand. Say bones.
No bones but say bones. Say ground. No ground but say ground. So as to say
pain. No mind and pain? Say yes that the bones may pain till no choice but
stand. Somehow up and stand. Or better worse remains. Say remains of mind
where none to permit of pain. (E6.1–15)

In  this  fragment  the  original  sentence  “Had  to  get  up  in  the  end  and  stands”,
which  already  omits  the  subject  (“it”),  in  addition  loses  the  verb  “get”  in  the
published version, resulting in the unusual construction “Had to up in the end and
stand”. Similarly “Till it has to stand” becomes “Till no choice but stand”, omit-
ting both subject and main verb. Finally, the two phrases “Or just enough. Say just
enough  mind  for  pain”,  though  not  fully  formed,  are  straightforward  enough
sentences, while their later incarnation as “Or better worse remains. Say remains
of mind where none to permit of pain” is almost impossible to parse. Numerous
further examples of the removal of conventional syntactic and semantic structure
may  be  readily  found.  “Just  enough  mind  for  pain”  (A6.15)  is  less  diﬃcult  to
understand than “remains of mind ... to permit of pain” (C6.15); “Say short for be
said” is turned into the more cryptic “Say for be said” in C2, etc.

The same tendency towards greater diﬃculty may be observed at large. Manu-
script B has a series of four explanations of the narrator’s narrative conventions

21

VOLUME 1

which all employ the same formula: “No more now x now y. From now x only”
(73, 74, 79a, 88). Of the four, the former two are retained in later drafts, while the
latter two are gradually deleted. While in C81 and D81 “All undimmed that words
dim”  is  further  explained  as  “Unwarped  that  words  warp”,  this  explanation  is
deleted from the ﬁnal version. “So far were not the one and twain” (28.6) is a
puzzling phrase that was originally slightly clearer in manuscript B: “So far [sc.
unchanging] but for the one and twain”.

At the same time, it is certainly not the case that Beckett’s ﬁrst draft was easy to
comprehend,  diﬃculty  being  added  by  design  to  obfuscate.  Some  of  the  most
cryptic sentences in the ﬁnal text were present from the beginning: “But say by
way of somehow on somehow with sight to do” has not strayed far from the MS
original: “Say none the less by way of on somehow with sight to do”. (It was
observed earlier that the evidence strongly suggests that Beckett to a large extent
composed from such ready-formed phrases.) Rather, it appears to be a function of
Beckett’s overall design to reduce the breadth of his narrator’s vocabulary. Some
words  and  phrases  simply  disappear  from  the  narrative;  others  are  replaced  by
words from the “core vocabulary” employed by the ﬁnal text. In other words,
there is a gravitation towards key words. Examples of such key words are dim,
which in the course of revision replaces both “faint” and “fair” as adjectives; the
noun “light” (which it originally only qualiﬁed); but also the verb to veil (B79 and
C79). Similarly, “glued” and “fastened” in manuscript B both become “clamped”
in  typescript  D  and  in  the  ﬁnal  text  the  word  ooze,  used  variously  as  a  noun,
adjective and verb, replaces all of the following: the verbs “drop” and “drip” (e.g.,
65); the adjective “adrip” (e.g., 68); the nouns “words” (e.g., 81) and “drips” (e.g.,
77), and the noun phrase “drip drip” (e.g., 77).

Reduction of the vocabulary is accompanied by increased punning, as fewer
words are made to serve more purposes. “Worsen in vain” changes to “Worse for
naught”, with “for naught” meaning both in vain and towards nothing. The change
from “all but gone” (B86.2 and C86.2; B86.8 and C86.8) to “as good as gone”
(D86) not only brings it in line with “as good as gone” in B86.14 and C86.14, but
it adds a play on the fact that there is “Only one good”, which is to be “Gone”
(84.4–5).

Among other changes on the lexical level the introduction into the published
text of formulaic repetition, already mentioned, is worth remarking on brieﬂy. It

22

INTRODUCTION

has a notable incantatory eﬀect. Against two occurrences of “say” in the section of
A6 quoted above the published text has seven. Also, for example, prosodic fea-
tures  (and  the  use  of  that  term  rightly  suggests  that  the  text  has  many  of  the
characteristics of poetry) such as rhyme, alliteration, assonance, but also paragraph
structure and metre are much reﬁned in the published text.

Rhyme of various kinds (including alliteration and assonance) is a signiﬁcant
characteristic of Worstward Ho from the ﬁrst draft to the ﬁnal text. Examples from
manuscript A that do not occur in the ﬁnal text include: “Till stick for good. Sick
for good” (A6); and “In the light of the night-light” (A7). However, “The child’s
hand raised to reach the holding hand” (A20), survives virtually unchanged through
all stages of the text. An example of the search for rhyme in the revision process is
when “bones” suggests “stones” (B6) as a better choice than ground, ﬂoor or earth
(A6, B6) to describe the cause of the pain felt by the bones. In D and the ﬁnal
version, Beckett returns to ground.

A further observation from the comparison of the ﬁrst and ﬁnal versions of the
text is that the ﬁrst two paragraphs of the published text are absent from the early
drafts. Close scrutiny of these ﬁrst two paragraphs, which were added as late as
typescript D stage, and the paragraphs immediately following shows that despite
Beckett’s  extensive  revisions,  a  break  in  style  occurs  between  paragraph  2  and
following paragraphs. The ﬁrst two paragraphs, which are among the densest in
the  book,  are  modelled  on  the  heavily  elliptic  style  of  the  middle  and  end  of
Worstward Ho, while paragraphs three and following (which constitute the original
opening paragraphs) to an extent only appear to be elliptic, even in their ﬁnal
published form.

Say a body. Where none. No mind. Where none. That at least. A place. Where
none. For the body. To be in. Move in. Out of. Back into. No. No out. No
back. Only in. Stay in. On in. Still. (3)

The staccato of short phrases in 3, 5 and 6 sounds deceptively like the elliptic style
of a paragraph such as 7:

All  of  old.  Nothing  else  ever.  But  never  so  failed.  Worse  failed.  With  care
never worse failed.

23

VOLUME 1

However, on closer inspection, the staccato eﬀect of 3 can be seen to be as it were
merely mock ellipsis: most of these brief phrases could be regarded as arbitrarily
cut up and divided by full stops. There appears to be no reason, for example, not
to read “A place where none for the body to be in” as one phrase rather than four,
without any punctuation. These paragraphs thus betray their origins as the text’s
original opening paragraphs. In contrast, the later elliptic style on the whole sepa-
rates syntactic sentences (and semantically discrete units) rather than arbitrary phrases.
In the genesis from A to E we ﬁnd that Beckett has done much to develop the
deliberately elliptic style of Worstward Ho, and the sentences become more au-
tonomous.

The last paragraph was similarly added at a late stage; in fact even later than the
opening:  in  typescript  E.  While  it  appears  to  add  a  sense  of  circularity  to  the
narrative (by repeating the last sentence of the opening paragraph verbatim), at the
same time it makes a statement of ﬁnality by drawing attention to the fact that the
previous paragraph has indeed said “nohow on”, words which the opening para-
graph had announced as the point where the narrator might be released of his duty
to go on. The last paragraph amounts to the narrator’s own conclusion of his epic
achievement.

It was suggested earlier that some of the evidence is by no means conclusive.
Nevertheless, the text of Worstward Ho appears to be shaped from a combination
of—frequently a clash between—two forces: a primary, almost subconscious, one,
consisting of pre-existing phrases driving the composition, and a secondary one,
shaping the text according to a conscious plan.

Study of the genesis of the text of Worstward Ho is most rewarding for a number
of reasons. Lexically, the process of revision shows the painstaking precision of
Beckett’s use of language. The alternatives Beckett ponders, and the choices he
ﬁnally makes, give an insight into his appraisal of the vocabulary of the English
language. The lexical variants also provide some help in examining and interpret-
ing the elusive and hermetic ﬁnal text of Worstward Ho itself. Syntactically, the
evidence of the manuscript and typescript drafts shows the development of Worstward
Ho’s characteristic style, thereby elucidating it to some extent. Though the ﬁrst
draft has many of the stylistic peculiarities of the ﬁnal text, the further drafts show
the deliberate manner in which Beckett, once he had found the right tone, con-
sciously went about applying a style.

24

INTRODUCTION

The most striking compositional developments are thematic and narrative. No
doubt the most signiﬁcant conclusion to emerge here is that Beckett’s revisions
are evidence of a conscious plan to remove clues that allow the reader to make the
customary identiﬁcations between the imaginary and the real world, foiling all
attempts  on  the  reader’s  part  to  map  the  imaginary  onto  the  real  world.  This
process of stripping involves “narrative” details of setting and plot, but also the
sort of linguistic information needed to experience language as a transparent com-
munication medium. The result is that from one draft to the next Worstward Ho’s
narrative and language have an increasingly alienating eﬀect, showing a noticeable
tendency  toward  greater  diﬃculty,  even  obscurity.  By  drawing  attention  to  its
own artiﬁce, in Worstward Ho language interposes itself between its referents and
the reader, adding to the breakdown of the representational connection between
language and the world.

The evidence from the MSs and TSs of Worstward Ho further points toward a
teleological development in this breakdown of the representational connection
between language and the world from the ﬁrst abandoned manuscript to the ﬁnal
published text. Worstward Ho’s concern is with closure, in subject matter, style and
method, but also in the development of the text: the stripping away of details,
narrative and linguistic, which is central to the revision process from ﬁrst manu-
script draft to published text.21

In  fact,  in  view  of  Worstward  Ho’s  position  as  the  last  major  prose  work  in
Beckett’s oeuvre, the theme of closure might be taken one step further.22 Closure is
most centrally embodied in the worsening process, which reduces the book’s nar-
rator from a mind inside a head to an “ooze” inside a skull with one hole mid-
forehead, and ultimately to a mere pinhole in the dim void. The image of the skull
as it ﬁgures so prominently in Worstward Ho may serve rather aptly as a metaphor
for the place of this last major text in Beckett’s oeuvre, that is, as its caput mortuum or
tête morte.

Alan Schneider’s remark that every line of Beckett contains all of Beckett23 may
be a hyperbole, but that Worstward Ho contains the essence, “the residuum re-
maining  after  the  distillation  or  sublimation  of  the  substance”  (OED,  “caput
mortuum”) of Beckett’s work would appear to be close to the truth. In the early
1970s Beckett commented on his Residua and Fizzles that “They are residual (1)
Severally, even when that does not appear of which each is all that remains and (2)

25

VOLUME 1

In relation to whole body of previous work”.24 Worstward Ho is a caput mortuum in
both these senses: residual of itself as well as of Beckett’s oeuvre. One meaning of
caput mortuum is that of dregs, “good for nothing but to be ﬂung away, all virtue
being extracted”, as the OED has it, but it is worth bearing in mind that the alche-
mists  distilled  their  caput  mortuum  in  their  search  for  the  elixir  of  life.  We  can
choose between these two apparently conﬂicting meanings if we like, but perhaps
we do not have to: we may accept that these meanings are not only both present
in Worstward Ho, but that they are equally relevant.

PUBLICATION HISTORY
Writing never came easy to Beckett, and the writing of Worstward Ho was cer-
tainly no exception. Beckett complained to Alan Schneider that he was “Strug-
gling with impossible prose. English. With loathing.”25 The eﬀort may have been
large, but so were the rewards. To his friend André Bernold he said that Worstward
Ho was “the ﬁnal point”, and that he hoped Worstward Ho had “achieved him”.26
This was not the only occasion when Beckett hinted that he expected to write no
more  after  Worstward  Ho.  In  a  review  of  Stirrings  Still  (1988)  Robert  Scanlan,
another friend, quoted Beckett as having said on completing Worstward Ho in 1983
that “The writing is over”, adding his estimation that Beckett “had simply and
quite deliberately reconciled himself to not writing anything again.”27 While work-
ing on Worstward Ho Beckett wrote to John Kobler, “Work & life continue. Last
lap feeling.”28 And in August of the next year, after Worstward Ho’s publication,
“Mind blank, carcass weary, no projects beyond the morrow.”29 It should be noted,
though, that Beckett was in the habit of announcing the end of his writing with
some regularity:

Of everything he said it was going to be the last book. How It Is was going to be
the last book. He said he didn’t have anything else to write. He very often said:
“I don’t feel I have anything to write anymore.” And then he went on to write
several other things. Stirrings Still came about because Barney Rosset, having
been booted out of Grove Press, wrote to him and said: “Can you give me
something new that I could publish under my own name?”

Beckett was always very pessimistic about his life time. I mean, no other
Beckett lived as long as he lived. The whole family died young. He expected to

26

INTRODUCTION

die in that period of ’47, ’49, when he was writing Godot and the Trilogy,
when he had cancer of the cheeks. It wasn’t and they removed it. He might
have lived another three or four years if he had not had emphysema. (Interview
with John Calder, Paris, 15–16 July 1997)

How little Beckett’s notion of having nothing left to write about had to do with
age is attested by the following passage from a letter to the Irish novelist Aidan
Higgins, dated 8 February 1952:

L’Innommable, due out probably in the spring, seems about the end of the jaunt
as far as I am concerned, there being nobody left to utter and, independently
perhaps, certainly superﬂuously, nothing left to utter about.”30

But whereas The Unnamable ends with “on”, Worstward Ho ends with “nohow
on”; there is a greater sense of closure in Worstward Ho than in any of Beckett’s
previous works, and Beckett may well have been aware of this himself over and
beyond his usual diﬃdence about his writing. To Kay Boyle he wrote in Decem-
ber of 1983:

Seem to have succeeded at last in writing myself into the ground.31

Creatively, the 1970s—the decade preceding the composition (in 1981–1982) and
publication  of  Worstward  Ho  (in  1983)—had  been  rather  thin  for  Beckett.  His
output consisted of ﬁve short works for television and the theatre, Not I, That
Time, Footfalls, Ghost Trio and ... but the clouds ..., and in prose the “ﬁzzles” and
other “residua” and some brief fragments that were to become part of the more
extensive prose works of the 1980s: Fizzles, “The Cliﬀ”, “As the Story Was Told”,
“Heard in the Dark 1”, “Heard in the Dark 2”, “One Evening”, and “neither”.
When Company appeared in 1980, it heralded a period of renewed creativity
not dissimilar to that of the “siege in the room” of the late 1940s and early 1950s,
with the publication of Ill Seen Ill Said (1981) and Worstward Ho (1983). Besides
these three major prose works, in the same period of four years Beckett wrote for
performance A Piece of Monologue, Rockaby, Ohio Impromptu, Quad, Catastrophe,
Nacht und Träume, and What Where.

27

VOLUME 1

The ﬁrst draft of Worstward Ho was written over a period of some eight months,
between August 1981 and March 1982, mainly in Paris rather than Ussy. In the
process of revision, the text then went through two consecutive draft typescripts
before Beckett presented the ﬁnal typescript to his British publisher, John Calder.
The publication history of Worstward Ho proper might be said to have commenced,
somewhat inauspiciously, one night at the restaurant La Palette at the Boulevard
Montparnasse in Paris in the autumn of 1982. Just before the company broke up
after the meal, Calder enquired whether Beckett was working on anything.

He said, “I have this” and he opened his briefcase and took it out and handed
it to me in its plastic folder and said, “If you mightn’t like it, you don’t have to
publish it.” And I carried it away like that in its plastic folder, down here to the
Falstaﬀ and there I left it behind simply. I probably put it behind the other chair
or something like that propped on the table. I had to go back at four o’clock in
the morning and go through all the poubelles, you know. Then I ﬁnally found it
at the bottom under egg shells and all the tidbits of the restaurant. A great relief.32

The typescript of Worstward Ho submitted in this manner, Calder proceeded to
read it in his Paris hotel that very night, and came to the verdict that it was a “most
remarkable” book. It was duly accepted for publication:

I am very happy about worstward ho! which I think we can make a 48-page
book, and we will keep it simple typographically as with company, on this
occasion not working with Grove who have diﬀerent design ideas. I enclose a
contract and as this is an English text I presume you will want us to handle the
various European rights other than French.33

The process from copy to book then followed a pattern like much of Beckett’s

work. Author’s proofs were presumably sent out and returned corrected:34

Van der Weel: Do you remember whether Beckett put any last-minute changes
in the proofs of Worstward Ho?
Calder: I could not swear to it. I cannot remember. We always sent him every
proof. While reading the proof, he would ﬁnd an improvement or a new idea.

28

INTRODUCTION

Van der Weel: Rosset’s publication is exactly in accordance with the ﬁnal type-
script, whereas in your publication there are these few minor diﬀerences.
Calder: In that case Beckett would have ordered them. (Interview with John
Calder, Paris, 15–16 July 1997)

The book was typeset and printed in 16pt Monotype Bembo by New Western
Printing Ltd, Bristol, and bound by Hunter & Foulis Ltd in Edinburgh. Though
there was ample scope for co-operation between Beckett’s two English language
publishers,  also  as  a  result  of  the  fact  that,  at  Beckett’s  request,  US  editions  of
Beckett’s works always follow UK spelling, such co-operation did not often hap-
pen, though in the case of Beckett’s previous prose publication, Ill Seen Ill Said, it
had. Ill Seen Ill Said was typeset in the US, and Calder printed the UK edition in
oﬀset  from  the  US  type  for  reasons  of  economy.  However,  Worstward  Ho  was
produced entirely independently by John Calder (Publishers) and Grove Press. As
he admitted in his letter to Beckett, Calder had not liked the Grove Press typo-
graphy for Ill Seen Ill Said. Indeed, the diﬀerence in approach, not only to typog-
raphy, but to book production in general, between the two publishers was (and
remains) immense. Calder preferred to use traditional letterset printing for as long
as it remained feasible, favouring a page and cover design which might variously
be called “timeless” or “staid”; Grove Press combined oﬀset lithography with a
typography which might either be called “garish” or “contemporary”. Calder’s
hard cover edition was made of sewn quires, Grove Press’ of glued loose leaves in
what the trade so fantastically terms “perfect binding”.

Publicity was embarked on, John Calder (Publishers) sending out 55 review
copies. These went to the national dailies (5), Sunday papers (6), provincial papers
(17), radio (3), and a list of such various media as literary and opinion weeklies and
monthlies (22). Bernard Levin, as critic for the Sunday Times, also received a re-
view copy of his own; Die Zeit was the only foreign newspaper on the list. Three
copies  were  oﬀered  for  deposit  to  the  British  Library,  the  National  Library  of
Wales, and the Copyright Receipt Oﬃce. The Arts Council, who subsidised the
publication, received a copy, and Beckett received ten author’s copies.35

The UK edition of Worstward Ho was oﬃcially published on Thursday 28 April
1983,36  almost  simultaneously  with  the  US  publication,  which  occurred  also  in
April,37 despite the fact that there was no co-operation between Calder and Grove

29

VOLUME 1

Press on this occasion. The cover price was £5.50—more than the £4.95 at which
it was listed in the ﬁrm’s listing of “New Books January–August 1983” in the 12
February 1983 issue of The Bookseller.

Though  acceptance  by  Beckett’s  UK  and  US  publishers  would  scarcely  have
been an issue even if the book had not been as remarkable as it was,38 it is worth
noting that a prose text of less than 4500 words coming from almost any other
writer than Samuel Beckett is unlikely to have found a trade publisher prepared to
issue it as a separate book. Few readers would, moreover, have been prepared to
pay £5.50 or $8.95 (in 1983) for the ﬁrst hardbound edition of a book whose
shortness was if anything only accentuated by the attempt at disguising it through
the use of 16pt type.39 But by the time Beckett produced Worstward Ho shortness
had been a well-established feature of his writing for a considerable time. By then
there was a suﬃciently large and loyal following of buyers for his slim volumes
that length—or rather, the lack of it—need not be a consideration for his publish-
ers. In fact, Worstward Ho (1983) was the third in a sequence, following Company
(1980) and Ill Seen Ill Said (1981), of prose texts which, for all their slimness, were
more substantial than anything Beckett had worked on since How It Is (1964), the
last work of conventional length Beckett wrote.

Beckett’s early prose had been verbose, and, apart from the concise criticism of
Proust, resulted in book publications of ample substance, from Murphy, via Watt to
the trilogy (Molloy, Malone Dies and The Unnamable) and How It Is. But after How
It Is Beckett’s prose, along with his drama, had become shorter. From the early
1960s separate publications of both drama and prose texts began to appear of no
more than a few pages, such as Happy Days, Imagination Dead Imagine, The Lost
Ones, Lessness, Not I. Many factors may have contributed to this decrease in length,
such as increasing pressure from both publishers and magazine editors for new
work, and Beckett’s personal involvement with the direction of productions of his
plays, which allowed him little leisure to work at longer texts. Then there was
Beckett’s own sense of creative impasse, which no longer allowed him to write at
any length. Most importantly, though, Beckett’s own tendency was increasingly
towards economy, distillation, and reﬁnement.

Despite the authority of Beckett’s name and the loyal following that he had
acquired for his books, it took a long time before his publishers began to feel at
ease with issuing such brief works. One of the ﬁrst and shortest of the short texts

30

issued as a separate publication (it came to less than 1100 words) was Imagination
Dead Imagine (1965). The blurb (which itself amounted to 670 words) betrays just
how uncomfortable Beckett’s British publishers, then Calder and Boyars, were
with its length:

INTRODUCTION

...  [Beckett’s]  recent  work  has  become  increasingly  economical  as  he  pares
away  from  it  everything  that  detracts  from  the  central  focus,  including  the
poetry of language, the aesthetic relief of ﬁne prose, the sorties and asides from
the main content that ﬁll up space in other books. The present short work was
conceived as a novel, started as a novel, and in spite of its brevity, remains a
novel, a work of ﬁction from which the author has removed all but the essen-
tials, having ﬁrst imagined them and created them. It is possibly the shortest
novel ever published. It may well be numbered amongst the most important.
... These few pages contain not only some of the most concentrated writing
that has ever been attempted, but also a poetic quality of the highest level, so
that this strange text by a great modern master, can stand beside and perhaps
even above his earlier achievements.

This unease is understandable enough in view of the fact that they were selling a
14-page booklet for 7s6d. Two years later, in 1967, the same publishers published
the “dramaticule” Come and Go—a mere ten pages at 8s6d—remarking on the
cover ﬂap:

This dramaticule is Samuel Beckett’s most recent play and his shortest to date,
written at a time when his prose is also appearing in a highly condensed form.
In spite of its brevity ... (Come and Go: Dramaticule, Calder, 1967)

The shortness of Beckett’s work continued to be a focus for publishers’ blurbs

almost to the end. In 1980 Beckett’s US publishers wrote:

Beckett has reduced the storyline of Company to the sparest of prose which, in
its distilled form, accentuates what Alvarado Alvarez calls “his unfailing stylistic
control and economy of language, his remorseless stripping away of superﬂuities.”
(Company, Grove Press, 1980)40

31

VOLUME 1

The UK edition of Worstward Ho itself came with the following advertisement on
its cover:

Since  his  70th  birthday,  Samuel  Beckett  has  written  a  number  of  extended
prose works or novellas, compact and highly concentrated works of imagina-
tion that combine a narrative element with a charged emotive use of words
unlike anything else written in our time. After Company and Ill Seen Ill Said,
Worstward Ho moves even further into the world of pure imagination.

With almost unbelievable economy of words—which themselves bring the
will  to  exist  into  existence—the  speaker  says  what  must  be  said  or  perhaps
missaid, creating the body that does not want to be created, the place where it
exists, the mind or lack of it, because nothing exists here of necessity or by
choice. What is real is the pain, the failure and desire to “Fail again. Fail better.”
This extraordinary text is not just a presentation of the pain of the human
condition clothed in a new language of audacious originality and startling beauty.
It is also rich in anecdote, contains unforgettable imagery and a poetry that is as
visual and musical as it is literary.  As so often before, Mr Beckett has created
magic, transforming the emptiest of voids and insubstantiality of material into a
whole unforgettable world that will live with the reader and become part of his
own world of experience. (John Calder, 1983)

It is worth noting that Calder, while emphasizing the economy of Beckett’s
language,  talks  of  Worstward  Ho  as  the  third  of  the  “extended  prose  works  or
novellas”, of which Company and Ill Seen Ill Said were the ﬁrst two. By 1980,
Beckett had become so much the writer of minimalist prose and drama, published
in minimalist publications, that Company, Ill Seen Ill Said and Worstward Ho ap-
peared lengthy by contrast.

The ﬁrst review of Worstward Ho appeared in Punch of 27 April 1983, the day
before the oﬃcial date of publication. The review, by Jane McLoughlin, is a dou-
ble bill with The Philosopher’s Pupil by Iris Murdoch, under the title “Dubliners”.
John Calder sent Beckett a copy, commenting:

Worstward Ho is out this week and the enclosed review is in Punch, perceptive
for them. (Letter, 26 April 1983, IMEC)

32

Indeed, this ﬁrst review of the book demonstrates a greater than average degree of
understanding and sympathy, but it does not, ultimately, take it quite seriously:

INTRODUCTION

Beckett achieves an extraordinary blow by blow account of the act of creation,
of putting imagination into words. ... Don’t be daunted by the sparseness, the
concentration, and the words imploded like a shotgun burst played backwards.
Beckett is certainly aware that what he is doing—and what God did?—is essen-
tially absurd. If you don’t laugh aloud, you will be amused. (Punch, 27 April
1983, p. 80)

Sympathy  and  understanding,  and  a  willingness  to  take  Beckett  seriously  even
while  recognizing  the  absurdity,  or  utter  impossibility,  of  Beckett’s  pursuit  in
Worstward Ho as in his earlier work, are by no means a matter of course. A study of
the reception of Beckett’s work by the public (as distinct from the academic) press
would be most rewarding; even the cursory survey conducted towards the present
discussion reveals a deep-seated uneasiness with Beckett’s work lurking under-
neath even the most accepting and sympathetic critical stance.

In the TLS Valentine Cunningham opens his review of Worstward Ho entitled
“A Master’s More of Less”, with the question “Who reads Beckett?”, which he
proceeds to answer, “One doubts if they are all that many. ... Worstward Ho ... is
for the steady customers, whoever they are, the people waiting, one imagines not
unkeenly, to pick up where the last published text of the master, Ill Seen, Ill Said
[sic], left them.”41 The question, here as in so many other reviews, is obviously fed
by an unspoken ambivalence about the value of Beckett’s minimalist writings, and
the felt need to defend the critical attention. Stephen Bann’s review of Worstward
Ho in the London Review of Books opens thus:

The less there is to see, the more there is to say. Such might be the motto of the
Beckett enthusiast. An ingenious recent article by James Hansford devotes almost
twenty pages to a story whose original manuscript consists of a bare page of type-
script. But the apparent neglect of due critical economy is easily explained by
the character of Beckett’s corpus of writings. ... [A]s the new pieces of writing
become slighter and slighter—judged by the crude criterion of length—so the
challenge to the attentive reader is maximised. (16 June–6 July 1983, p. 17)

33

VOLUME 1

But that the challenge presented by these ever slighter pieces deserves to be
taken up is not self-evident to every critic. In a 1986 essay entitled “The serious-
ness of Samuel Beckett”, Geoﬀrey Strickland asserts that “The more disturbing
one ﬁnds him the more compelling the need to answer the question: should one
take him seriously?”.42 In various guises, this is the question that appears, if mostly
implicitly, to inform most critical appraisals of Worstward Ho.

Very few critics commit themselves to a verdict on the question of how seri-
ously Beckett should be taken. John Banville, reviewing Nohow On in 1992, asks
himself, “What do they mean, these strange, fraught, desperate ﬁctions? Are we to
take any meaning from them?” But he does not proceed to give the reader his
answers  to  his  questions,  even  though  they  appear  to  be  more  than  rhetorical
ones. Reviewing Nohow On (as well as The Complete Short Prose, 1929–1989, edited
by S.E. Gontarski, and The World of Samuel Beckett, 1906–1946 by Lois Gordon) in
the New York Times Book Review of 26 May 1996 (p. 4) David Gates asserts that
Beckett has become “a problematic ﬁgure”. Gates is more outspoken than Banville
about  his  assessment  of  the  cause  of  his  unease:  it  is  his  lack  of  regard  for  the
ordinary reader. Beckett’s minimalist prose may be “purged of inessentials”, but

the John Gardner within us whispers that to make sense of this stuﬀ you have
to sit there mentally putting in the connective tissue yourself. Why should we
have to do Beckett’s dirty work for him?

He feels that the “middle-period prose—grim as death, funny as hell—is what
makes us want to give the rest of Beckett’s work the beneﬁt of the doubt”.

But Gates’ candidness about his appraisal of the late ﬁction is very much an
exception.  The  main  obstacle  confronting  reviewers  is  probably  the  extent  of
Beckett’s known faithful following, which constitutes a powerful stronghold of
received opinion. A book review is not usually the sort of occasion where the
forces of dissent get full play. Here, as in the case of the decision to publish, which
was brieﬂy discussed earlier, Beckett’s stature and fame interfere. Naturally, this is
a complication which extends to an assessment of Beckett’s wider critical standing,
among academics, students, and non-professional readers; however, the present
discussion will conﬁne itself to the appraisal of just Worstward Ho, and touch on
the wider issue only insofar as the reviews in question give occasion.

34

INTRODUCTION

The  diﬃculty  of  Worstward  Ho  is  often  commented  on.  While  most  critics
profess to feel that the reader’s eﬀort is ultimately rewarded to a greater or lesser
degree, outspoken value judgements are rare. Neil Philip, writing in the British
Council’s British Book News, is the reviewer who comes closest to a downright
dismissal:

[T]he  words  refuse  to  connect  with  each  other  in  sequence  ...  [F]or  those
unwilling or unable to respond to patterning rather than progression Worstward
Ho  must  appear  both  boring  and  meaningless.  Beckett’s  steady  gaze  with
“clenched staring eyes” at the unalterable fact of death can certainly be com-
fortable for no one. (British Book News, August 1983)

The  most  favourable  review,  a  positively  lyrical,  but  also  astute  assessment  of
Worstward Ho, comes from Hermione Lee in The Observer.43 Her journalistic form
of reviewing does not take it for granted that the reader is au fait with Beckett’s
concerns and achievements to date, though she clearly is so herself. Professional
readers may recognise the “consistent idea of existence” presented in the succes-
sion of minimalist works of which Worstward Ho is the latest, but what would “the
occasional reader, faced with one short baﬄing text with a terrible pun for a title”
make of it, singly? This is a legitimate question rarely enough faced by academic
critics, whether or not in their guise as journalists.

Both the UK and US ﬁrst (hardback) editions having appeared in April 1983,
paperback editions followed in both territories in 1984. In 1989, the year of Beckett’s
death, Worstward Ho was reprinted twice: once by the Limited Editions Club in
America, and once by John Calder, in both cases in one volume together with
Company (1980) and Ill Seen Ill Said (1981):

Ben Schiﬀ [sic] who is, with your agreement, doing a special limited edition of
NOHOW ON (COMPANY, ILL SEEN ILL SAID & WORSTWARD HO) to coincide with
our putting the three together (we are going to use his typography) will be in
Paris the same time as myself and would like to see you for a minute, if you are
well enough, to show you his typography and design, but I am not pushing
him at you. I think you got on reasonably well when you met last. (Letter from
Calder to Beckett, 4 March 1988, IMEC, Paris)

35

VOLUME 1

The Limited Editions Club edition was founded in 1929; it was purchased by
Sidney Shiﬀ in 1979, with the aim of concentrating on quality printing and top-
rank modern artists and photographers. The edition of Nohow On was illustrated
with etchings by Robert Ryman. When Beckett was ﬁrst shown Ryman’s etchings,
of white texture on white paper, he is supposed to have exclaimed:

I can’t see anything. They’re perfect!44

It  was  printed  letterpress  on  hand-made  paper,  bound  in  goatskin,  boxed,  and
appeared in an edition of 550 copies, signed by Beckett and Ryman. The type for
the edition was English Monotype Bodoni, with the descending characters newly
cut by Daniel Carr. John Calder did indeed use the type designed for the Limited
Editions Club edition to publish his own trade edition of Nohow On in 1989, and
again in 1992. In these (oﬀset) facsimile printings the thin descenders of the type,
designed for letterpress, proved not very successful.

Unlike nearly all of his other work, Beckett never translated Worstward Ho into
French.45 On 1 August 1983 Beckett wrote to Antoni Libera that he could not
translate Worstward Ho into French.46 Apparently at one stage Beckett scholar Jean-
Jacques Mayoux, Professor of English, Sorbonne, was asked by Jerôme Lindon,
also on behalf of Beckett, to translate Worstward Ho.47 In the end the task was,
again at the request of Lindon, taken on by Edith Fournier, who had been work-
ing as a translator from the early 1960s. Her translation, entitled Cap au pire, was
published by Les Éditions de Minuit in September 1991.48

In the aftermath of Worstward Ho’s publication, some three months later, on
Thursday 4 August 1983, the BBC’s Radio 3 broadcast a reading of Worstward Ho
spoken  by  Norman  Rodway.49  In  1985  a  stage  dramatisation  of  Worstward  Ho
received its world premiere in New York, in a performance by Frederick Neumann.50
The Limited Editions Club edition was the ﬁrst to publish Worstward Ho in one
volume with Company and Ill Seen Ill Said, but Beckett’s British publisher, John
Calder, claims that it was in fact he who ﬁrst suggested the idea of presenting the
three texts as a trilogy. In a letter to the Irish novelist John Banville he wrote:

It was my idea to put the three together as a trilogy, but Sam instantly liked it,
and gave it its title.51

36

INTRODUCTION

However, the act of publishing three books in one volume does not necessarily
make them a trilogy. It is true that the three novels show a certain thematic simi-
larity: their emphasis on the act of narration itself more than on the narrative, for
example,  and  the  concurrent  focus  on  language  as  an  instrument  to  make  the
narrative possible. It is also true that after the brief and fragmented prose writings
of the 1970s, Company, Ill Seen Ill Said and Worstward Ho are more substantial, and
can be seen to return to a more narrative and more inclusive mode. The three
texts further share the same emphatic division into isolated paragraphs: brief frag-
ments of text of rarely more than a page or so in length. These inherent similari-
ties, as much as the contrast with the prose of the preceding period, will have done
much to foster the notion that these three brief “novels” could be regarded as a
trilogy in some sense. If it is true, as Calder claims (and there is no reason to doubt
it), that Beckett himself suggested the overall title for the publication of the three
novels in one volume, that would appear to lend weight to the trilogy claim.52

Nevertheless, the trilogy nature of the three works is not very obvious. Other
trilogies might suggest themselves, not less likely than Nohow On, depending on
one’s particular thematic interests. After all, Beckett’s thematic concerns have never
ranged very widely. The arbitrariness of the selection of the current three texts
may be best illustrated by Beckett’s own attitude as implied in his remark to Calder
when he was about to publish his edition of Nohow On:

At the last minute Beckett suddenly said “what about adding Stirrings Still?” I
said, “it’s too late.” Beckett thought they were four late texts that maybe would
go together. (Interview with John Calder, Paris, 15–16 July 1997)

John Calder is now indeed contemplating bringing out a new edition of Nohow
On eventually, adding Stirrings Still as Beckett suggested.

One  does  not  have  to  take  a  very  cynical  view  to  suspect  that  commercial
motives may have played a prominent part in the decision to publish Nohow On as
a trilogy. The record of published reviews shows that publishing the three texts
together gave them, if nothing else, a new lease of commercial life. Critics were
stimulated to review the texts from the perspective of their newly acquired status.
Even periodicals which had already reviewed the original separate publications
published reviews of Nohow On.53 The spate of new reviews illustrates that there

37

VOLUME 1

were very good commercial reasons for publishing the three short prose texts in
one volume. The attraction of Nohow On was not just the appearance of the three
individual titles in a new guise: it was their appearance in the guise precisely of a
trilogy as against any other form. However ﬁrmly Beckett himself had rejected the
branding of the sequence of Molloy, Malone Dies and The Unnamable as a trilogy
(“can’t bear the thought of the [word] trilogy appearing anywhere”),54 to Beckett
readers they have always been simply “the trilogy”.55

Underlying  the  discussion  is  the  basic  question  to  what  extent  the  author’s
work can and should be separated from the social and economic context in which
it has its being. Samuel Beckett may be a Nobel Prize winner; brevity may be the
ineluctable formal corrolary of Beckett’s thematic concern with economy, distilla-
tion, and reﬁnement; Beckett may have attracted a loyal band of specialist readers
to whom the expense of slim volumes is not a consideration: but ultimately Beckett’s
publishers operate in a world of economic and commercial realities to which their
practices must conform. And Beckett himself was understanding enough of the
pressure these realities brought to bear on his publishers to collude with them as
long as his principles were not compromised. Yet, does this mean that “the dy-
namic social relations which always exist in literary production”56 should necessar-
ily be allowed to prevail over authorial intention?

There now exist at least three (four if the Calder reissue of 1992 is counted
separately) editions of Nohow On in which Company, Ill Seen Ill Said and Worstward
Ho are, to all intents and purposes, presented as a trilogy. Despite S.E. Gontarski’s
words of caution in his Introduction to the Grove Press edition of Nohow On, the
presence of that Introduction has, of course, willy-nilly elevated the book to the
status of a scholarly edition, and so, paradoxically, by its very existence, the Intro-
duction  has  made  a  major  contribution  to  the  canonisation  of  Nohow  On  as  a
trilogy. As in the case of Beckett’s ﬁrst “3-in-1”, “dynamic social relations” with
publishers, scholars and critics seem stacked heavily in favour of the trilogy notion.
But  if  Beckett  himself  did  not  appear  to  have  had  a  trilogy  in  mind,  either
while writing, or even in retrospect, the issue is not whether Worstward Ho is part
of a late trilogy or a late tetralogy. Rather, one should pause and wonder whether
by acquiescing in his publisher’s proposal to bring the three titles out in one vol-
ume Beckett intended to suggest in any way that greater thematic intimacy exists
between Company, Ill Seen Ill Said and Worstward Ho than between any of his other

38

INTRODUCTION

works, even only the other late prose works. Surely the answer should be that he
did not and that it does not.

OBJECTIVE AND METHOD OF THE EDITION
The present edition aims to do two things. In the ﬁrst place, it provides the means
for  systematic  study  of  Worstward  Ho’s  textual  genesis  of  the  kind  suggested  in
“The Evolution of the Text” above.57 This purpose is best served by an evolution-
ary variorum edition. This edition therefore presents all primary texts as found in
the relevant documentary sources, and gives an account of all secondary informa-
tion, relevant to an understanding of the origin, evolution and publication history
of the primary texts. Secondly it establishes a reading text which varies slightly
from the current published texts, the  UK and the  US editions of 1983 and later,
which both suﬀer from minor corruptions.

The edition’s dual purpose requires two distinct editorial approaches. The study
of  Worstward  Ho’s  textual  genesis  requires  the  faithful  presentation  of  as  many
relevant  extant  documentary  sources  as  possible,  with  a  minimum  of  editorial
intrusion. Constituting a reading text, on the other hand, will be an act of critical
editing, and will involve the compilation of the ideal text as Beckett most likely
intended it, on the basis of the available documentary evidence.

Establishing a reading text
To begin with the latter, reconstructing the author’s ﬁnal intentions for the text in
order to arrive at an authoritative edition is not, in the case of Worstward Ho, very
problematic, at least from a practical point of view. There is no doubt that the
texts of both editions published during Beckett’s lifetime, the UK and US editions
of 1983, derive from the same ﬁnal typescript. This typescript raises few question-
able readings in the light of the textual genesis and is an obvious and undisputed
candidate to serve as the copy-text on which the reading text may be based. The
few discrepancies between the two printed editions can be easily resolved with
reference to the ﬁnal typescript and the evidence of the other documentary sources.
Equally, the case of Worstward Ho lacks many of the complications that have vexed
so much of the practice and theory of textual editing.

To begin with, all the documentary sources involved are the author’s own. It is
not necessary to contend with such transmissional corruption as used to be caused

39

VOLUME 1

by zealous scribes and is now frequently caused by conscientious desk or copy-
editors. There is no doubt that Beckett’s text is the work of a single individual; not
the  product  of  a  collaborative  eﬀort  or  otherwise  “shaped  by  social  forces  not
amenable to the control of [a] single individual”.58 Only the printed text could
technically be regarded as a non-authorial source. But Beckett’s acknowledged
authority as a master craftsman of language was such that neither of the two pub-
lishers involved would have needed—or dared—to question Beckett’s copy. Any
departures in the printed text from the copy as submitted by Beckett would be
accidental.59

Next, Worstward Ho does not present the challenge of the need to interpret the
product of a distant historical past. No reconstruction of a non-existing original
from scanty documentary sources is called for. Instead, the evidence is plentiful
and covers all stages of the text, including the fair copy submitted by Beckett to his
publishers. The task at hand is merely to resolve a handful of discrepancies be-
tween the two published texts, and to check for any further corruptions.

Though the complications might be limited in extent and nature, establishing a
critical text does not therefore necessarily become mechanical: “Even when manu-
scripts in the hand of the author and proof sheets corrected by the author survive,
the reconstruction of the text of a work from the texts of such documents can
never be accomplished with certainty. However much evidence survives, the pro-
duction of the texts of works always involves critical judgment” (Tanselle, p. 12).
After selection of the documentary source to serve as the basis for the reading text,
however, one of two fundamental positions recognised by Tanselle in reconstructing
the text ﬁnally intended by the author60 must be selected: “making no alterations
at all and making some (whether many or few) alterations” (p. 17). The choice is
essentially  that  between  considering  the  editing  task  as  concerning  a  particular
textual instance, or the more abstract work. The present edition opts for the latter.
This approach follows the dominant approach to textual editing in the second half
of the twentieth century, the eclectic copy-text school, whose “theoretical” ori-
gins can be traced to the inﬂuential essay “The Rationale of Copy-text” by the
textual scholar W.W. Greg.61 The importance of Greg was not just that he broke
with the rigidity of the single-text approach, but that he presented a more schol-
arly basis for the eclectic critical editing practice. Tanselle62 eloquently sums up
Greg’s theory of copy-text in a single sentence:

40

INTRODUCTION

... an editor would best approximate an author’s ﬁnally intended text by adopt-
ing as “copy-text” the text closest to the author’s manuscript (which would be
likely to preserve more of the accidentals of the manuscript than a text farther
removed from it) and by emending that copy-text with any later variants (par-
ticularly substantives) judged to be authorial, as well as with the editor’s own
corrections. (Tanselle, p. 22)63

The copy-text is usually found in a single physical documentary source, but the
copy-text approach is eclectic in the sense that it will adopt readings from other
documentary sources whenever there are good reasons for doing so. Though in
principle  the  adoption  of  a  single  physical  documentary  source  to  serve  as  the
ground text is not required, there is a signiﬁcant practical advantage in doing so:

Copy-text is a substratum text, conventionally document based, which serves
an edited text in ways deﬁned, or co-deﬁned, by the axioms of theory adopted
for that edited text. As a concept and term, it is therefore not absolute, but
relational. Positing the edited text as an ideal, an intentional, a versional, or a
social text will in each case diﬀerently determine the choice of the copy-text—
but in each case also editorial procedure suggests the advantage of having a
copy-text. It is a pragmatic advantage: by conventional rules of procedure, the
copy-text serves as the textual reference base for the acts of editing. (Quite
practically, the convention has it that the apparatus can aﬀord to be silent where
the edited text conforms to the copy-text.) ... What deﬁnes the notion of the
copy-text [...] is that the copy-text is the absent text. It is the text to depart
from—that is, both to take as origin, and to deviate from—in the editing proc-
ess; whereas it is the edited text that, through that process, is to be constructed,
established,  and  achieved.  (Hans  Walter  Gabler,  “On  Textual  Criticism  and
Editing: The Case of Joyce’s Ulysses”, in Greetham, pp. 204–5)

The following straightforward stemma may be constructed for Worstward Ho (A–
E are the sigla used henceforward in this edition):

A (aborted ﬁrst pages of MS)

|

41

VOLUME 1

B (holograph MS)

C (ﬁrst TS)

D (second TS)

E (fair copy TS)

|

|

|

|

UK proofs (missing; probably
checked by Beckett)

 < — >

US proofs (missing; probably
not checked by Beckett)

|

 |

1st (and subsequent) UK edns

1st (and subsequent) US edns

The third typescript, E (the author’s typescript as submitted to John Calder, his
British publisher), is the last documentary source in the sequence showing incon-
trovertible evidence of authorial involvement. As will be shown, it is the same
typescript which must have served as copy for the US edition: there is not a single
discrepancy between the typescript and the US printed edition. In the absence of
corrected proofs the typescript submitted by Beckett to the publisher by way of
copy  is,  of  all  authorised  texts,  the  text  that  comes  most  closely  to  the  text  as
Beckett intended it, and it serves as the copy-text for the establishment of the
deﬁnitive reading text. Typescript E is then emended, where necessary, on the
basis of the evidence from the genetic transliterations. The discrepancies brought
to light by collation of the printed editions are obvious points for editorial atten-
tion.  Comparison  at  large  between  the  copy-text  and  the  published  texts,  and
between the other documentary sources and the copy-text has failed to discover
more than a single further textual problem. (All textual problems are discussed in
detail below in the section “The reading text”.) Decisions to emend are based on
the authority of evidence obtained from an analysis of the text’s genetic history, to
the presentation of which we must now turn.

Presenting the genetic evidence
The second aim of the edition is to provide the means for systematic study of
Worstward Ho’s textual genesis. The emphasis here will be on the textual instances

42

INTRODUCTION

provided by the various documentary sources rather than on the work. The pres-
entation of the genetic evidence places greater practical demands on the editors
than  providing  the  reading  text,  as  well  as  bringing  its  own  share  of  issues  of
principle and theory. The following discussion will proceed from the assumption
that the student of the textual genesis of Worstward Ho is best served by (1) having
access to relevant documentary sources which it would otherwise be impossible,
complicated or time-consuming to consult, and (2) a suitable presentation of the
text of these sources: one which facilitates easy comparison and readability.

The possibilities for reproduction of the documentary sources range from fac-
simile, via diplomatic transliteration of the surface text (the end result after taking
into account all authorial substitutions, insertions and deletions) of each distinct
documentary source, to a transliteration of the very last of the documentary sources
accompanied by a single synoptic apparatus merging the evidence from all other
documentary sources. Each option has its own advantages and drawbacks.

In the case of a facsimile edition, the reproduction would need to render the
original faithfully, which is to say technically entirely transparent, though certain
techniques to enhance legibility might be permissible. Facsimile reproduction clearly
involves the minimum of editorial interference with the text. Secondly, it is the
best (in fact the only reliable) way to convey graphic information. On the other
hand, facsimile reproduction for purposes of distribution in print can rarely if ever
achieve such quality that it obviates the necessity of consulting the originals alto-
gether.64 Moreover, the absence of editorial interference in facsimile reproduction
constitutes at the same time a drawback. It oﬀers no help in the interpretation of
the graphic surface: Beckett’s handwriting—notoriously diﬃcult to decipher at
the best of times—is left for the user to wrestle with. Consequently it also fails to
facilitate easy comparison of sources. The practical use of a facsimile edition of
Worstward Ho sources would be very limited indeed to the student of the textual
genesis, and is therefore no option as the exclusive manner of presentation.

The alternative to a facsimile presentation is a transliteration of the relevant
documentary sources in some form. Transliteration, in whatever form, has one
major drawback: the imperfect way in which it is capable of representing graphic
information such as the nature of handwriting, the placing of corrections, etc.65

A diplomatic transliteration of the various sources would present a surface reading
of each, allowing changes between documentary sources to be examined, but not

43

VOLUME 1

the revisions within a source, which are equally part of the textual genesis. Synop-
tic transliteration solves that problem, but at the expense of readability. Countless
systems of symbols have been devised to represent the myriad manifestations of
authorial revision, but only in the case of uncomplicated manuscripts, with few or
simple (single-level) revisions can they achieve a relatively intuitive intelligibility.
The complexity and number of the documentary sources of Worstward Ho present
a considerable obstacle to the eﬃcacy of a synoptic transliteration for comparing
versions of the text, certainly if the evidence found in the complete set of docu-
mentary sources were to be merged in a single synoptic apparatus.

In view of the requirement that the reproduction of Worstward Ho’s documen-
tary sources should facilitate both easy comparison and readability, the translitera-
tions  should  reproduce  the  successive  variants  as  they  occur  in  the  successive
documentary  sources  as  transparently  as  possible  and  with  an  emphasis  on  the
succession of variants rather than on the ﬁnal result. (This need not conﬂict too
sharply with the other stated aim, of establishing the ﬁnal text for Worstward Ho
according to Beckett’s intentions, which requires the documentary evidence from
earlier drafts to be taken into account.) The present edition proposes to combine
a diplomatic transliteration of the various documentary sources with an apparatus
in which the genesis of each documentary source is detailed. This approach com-
bines a number of advantages. The clean reading text resulting from the critically
edited  diplomatic  transliteration  of  each  source  allows  each  version  to  be  read
separately without the need to reconstitute it from an inaccessible synoptic appa-
ratus; the apparatus allows the internal genesis of each source to be readily recon-
structed; and the diplomatic transliterations of the various sources—presented in
parallel—allow ready comparison of versions. As a result of the full surface trans-
literations per source, and also because it only needs to take account of a single
source at the time, the system of symbols employed can aﬀord to be less intricate,
and, it is hoped, more intuitive than a full synoptic apparatus would have to be.
Apart from the many practical advantages outlined, this manner of presentation
happens also to go a long way towards accommodating the increasingly popular
notion among textual editors that no single version of the text of a work ought to
be privileged over any other. This edition will, in fact, present fully-ﬂedged read-
ing texts of ﬁve versions of Worstward Ho (six if the do-it-yourself ﬁnal reading
text is included).

44

INTRODUCTION

Such a lavish presentation of ﬁve parallel texts in full is rare for obvious reasons;
the economics of publishing militate against it in the case of a longer text. Unless
there are pressing reasons for doing otherwise, scholars have of necessity restricted
themselves to delivering the textual variants only.66 Elaborate systems of indicating
implied  unchanged  text  have  been  designed  which,  though  workable,  do  not
always  favour  ease  of  reconstruction  of  the  various  levels  of  correction.  Their
absence  in  the  present  edition  has  allowed  the  transliteration  to  be  much  less
cluttered than is usual in other similar ventures.

The documentary sources to receive this  treatment are an autograph manu-
script (which may itself be usefully divided into an abandoned ﬁrst draft, A, and a
holograph text, B) and three typescripts (C, D, and E). Each of these documentary
sources is regarded as a witness to a temporary condition of the text as it is being
shaped by the author. Such a temporary condition will be referred to as a “ver-
sion” of Worstward Ho. (The term will be explained more fully below.) All of the
documentary sources mentioned, with the exception of A, represent a full ver-
sion; A covers the ﬁrst one-ﬁfth of the text approximately, and represents a ver-
sion of that one-ﬁfth.67 The corrected author’s proofs of the UK edition, if available,
would also constitute a version; however, they cannot be traced. The versions
represented by the published texts (both US and UK), insofar as they diﬀer from the
last typescript, cannot properly be regarded as versions shaped by the author; any
variants from the proofs they contained would be transmissional rather than ge-
netic. For the purpose of the present edition, the term “documentary source” will
be taken to cover authorised materials only. However, since the variant readings
they contain will also be discussed for the purpose of establishing the critical read-
ing text, the published texts are nevertheless included in the variorum apparatus,
though only in the notes to typescript E. In any case both the number and extent
of the variants involved is limited.

Versions
Ideally, the purpose of representing as much as possible of the authorial process
requires the presentation of as many stages in the evolution of the text as may be
clearly perceived and reconstructed with certainty from the evidence of the sources.
Here a complication arises: what constitutes a distinct stage in a text’s evolution?
This is an important question, which is not easily answered. To avoid a lengthy

45

VOLUME 1

theoretical discussion, only the choices made in the present edition, which do not
necessarily always follow established practice, will be presented for scrutiny.

It is proposed to treat the notion of distinct stages on two levels: that of the text
as a whole, and on the level of part of the text, from punctuation up to paragraphs
(or even, rarely, a limited number of paragraphs together). The term versions is
used to refer to stages of the complete text, and only when there can be no reason-
able doubt about the text’s integrity; that is to say, the author must have con-
sciously left it in that complete form for a period of time. As will become clear,
this means in practice that in this edition only the last, or surface, reading of any of
the documentary sources A–E can be called versions.

The concept of versions is best illustrated using the example of published texts,
where it could be most straightforwardly applied. The text is an immaterial entity,
with any number of concrete “incarnations”, in the form of material artefacts.68 If
the (complete) text in any artefact diﬀers from any other it may be called a “ver-
sion” of the text. If a comparison between two published texts shows variants (or
even a single variant), the two texts constitute two versions. Since variants do not
occur  within  one  edition  of  a  published  text,  the  version  is  identical  with  the
edition.69 However, the present edition does not regard the published text as rep-
resenting a stage in the evolution of the text as it is being shaped by the author. In
the case of documentary sources—manuscripts and typescripts, which will almost
invariably show revision, resulting in variant readings—the concept is more prob-
lematic. It is not the number of changes, and thus variants, within the same docu-
mentary source that is relevant here; the real complication is that it is diﬃcult to
establish which of the variants belong together to the same stage of composition,
and so may be said to form a version.

In theory, it is possible that an author writes a text out in full ﬁrst (constituting
a version), lets it rest, and then returns to it at a later date to revise the ﬁrst ver-
sion—a procedure which results in a second version. In the case of Worstward Ho,
Beckett composed the text in several stages. This might still theoretically result in
a  base  text  which  could  be  called  a  version  according  to  the  deﬁnition  given
above. The deﬁnition calls for a stage at which the complete text was allowed to
rest for a period; not for the complete text to have been created or recreated in a
single session. This situation could have occurred after Beckett had completed the
last stage of composition; the resulting version would have included all run-on

46

INTRODUCTION

(currente calamo) corrections as well as, presumably, a number of other revisions,
made  during  the  course  of  composition.  For  it  is  not  at  all  certain—even  un-
likely—that  all  non-run-on  revisions  were  made  after  the  text  was  completed.
While it is certainly true that a run-on correction must belong to the base level of
composition, conversely the use of intralinear or marginal space in revision does
not preclude the possibility of a particular revision having been made before the
following run-on correction in the same paragraph, and thus also belonging to the
base  level.  For  reconstituting  the  base  text  as  a  version,  dating  the  revisions  is
therefore vital. In the doucumentary sources of Worstward Ho the writing (both
ductus and medium) shows a variety of styles not only in the base text, but also in
the revisions. It is therefore not only possible but feasible that some changes were
made during the writing process, whether in the same session as the text they
correct or in the session following the text they revise, thus forming part of the
putative  “base  text”,  while  other  revisions  were  made  after  the  base  text  was
ﬁnished, forming part of a later stage of writing. (Run-on corrections—but not
straight deletions—are the only kind of revision that can be dated to the writing
stage with certainty.)

On the face of it, it ought to be simpler in the case of the typescripts than in the
case of the manuscripts to establish what should constitute the base text. In fact,
this  appears  not  to  be  the  case.  While  it  is  possible  to  isolate  cases  of  run-on
correction, which can thus be identiﬁed as belonging to the base version, con-
versely the fact that something is not a run-on correction does not mean that it
cannot belong to the base version. Typed corrections are sometimes run on, and
sometimes marginal. In most cases the typed marginal corrections appear to have
been made at the time of typing, but in some cases the horizontal alignment of the
corrections diﬀers from that of the body of the text, allowing the possibility that
they were added later.

For the same reason that in none of the sources a base text can be established to
qualify as a version (viz. the absence of conclusive graphic evidence about the
stage to which the revisions belong) the constitution of later versions of the text
within the same documentary source is also impossible, with the exception of the
ﬁnal stage: the surface text which results from taking into account all revision.
Hence the only texts of Worstward Ho that qualify to be called versions are the
surface texts of each documentary source. (Successive variants within sources may

47

VOLUME 1

be reconstructed in many individual cases; the concept of “revision levels” in-
volved in this will be discussed below.)

By way of an exception to the rule that a version must be of the complete text,
it is proposed to recognise manuscript A, which covers approximately the ﬁrst
ﬁfth of the text only, as a version of that ﬁfth. Apart from the fact that it represents
a  version  of  what  was  then  the  full  text—a  status  which  it  held  for  a  certain
period—it could also be argued that its status is diﬀerent from that of a revision
level in that (a) it concerns a much larger section of text than any of them, (b) it
may be recognised as a coherent textual unit and (c) that it is physically separate
and, through its abandonment, clearly marked as concluded if not completed.

Revision levels
The construct of versions allows the development of the text of Worstward Ho to
be followed as it is shaped from one documentary source to the next. However,
versions do not deal with the structure of the text within each documentary source,
as the edition’s stated aim would lead one to expect. The fact that no versions
other than that of the surface text can be reconstructed does not mean that no
distinct stages of composition can be discerned within a documentary source at all.
For such stages aﬀecting less than the full length of the text, and thus not repre-
senting a temporary condition of the text as it is being shaped by the author, a
diﬀerent term is proposed. In addition to versions of the text as a whole, within
each version (the surface text of a documentary source) revision levels will be iden-
tiﬁed.  With  the  aid  of  revision  levels  the  sequence  of  changes  that  led  to  the
surface text (the deep structure) will be reconstructed in as much detail as possible.
The practicalities of distinguishing revision levels will be further dealt with below,
after an examination of the physical appearance of the documentary sources.

To sum up, ﬁve versions will be printed in parallel, with revision levels within
each version being accounted for separately in the apparatus as much as possible.
The presentational details will be discussed later.

Problems of principle
The proposed solutions to the problem of presentation of the documentary evi-
dence is based on a number of assumptions that have so far been allowed to go
unchallenged. It has, for example, been suggested that versions of the text as found

48

INTRODUCTION

in documentary sources are characterised by their being diﬀerent not only from
each other, but also from an immaterial entity referred to as the work Worstward
Ho.70 Strictly speaking this construct of an immaterial “work” is not needed to
establish the nature of a version. Where it does become vital is in realizing the
other aim of the current edition, viz. to establish a reliable reading text. This was
implied in the editorial stance indicated earlier, that this reading text is not con-
structed by simply selecting one existing version of the text, but by exercising
critical judgment in amending one version on the basis of the evidence found in
other versions. By presenting the reading text as the text most likely ﬁnally in-
tended by the author, the editors are positing an ideal text: a text, in other words,
which never existed in any of the documentary sources. (That the actual changes
to be made to the copy-text in order to constitute the ideal text are minimal does
not minimise the importance of openly declaring the position taken. This is the
more so since editorial theorizing appears to be moving towards the notion that to
strive for a deﬁnitive edition is tantamount to striving for a form of perfection
which is not of this world, and therefore not to be attempted—a view which will
be brieﬂy examined further below.)

Another problem is that by allowing the surface reading of any documentary
source to constitute a version it has been tacitly implied that the physical boundary
of the documentary source must ipso facto indicate that Beckett left the text for a
signiﬁcant period of time at that point. However, there is no guarantee whatso-
ever that Beckett did, in fact, cease work on the text after completing the last
revision of any of the sources. Nor, indeed is there any evidence (which is in a
sense what the deﬁnition of “version” implies) that Beckett would have consid-
ered  any  of  these  stages  deﬁnitive,  even  for  a  short  time.  Examination  of  the
documentary evidence for Worstward Ho shows that the last stage represented by
one source never agrees with the ﬁrst stage of its sequel (insofar as this may be
reconstructed at all). This would appear to indicate that the compositional process
continues as it were in the interstices between the physical documents. In other
words, Beckett may well have abandoned revision of the former while mentally
preparing further revision to be implemented immediately in the process of re-
writing or retyping. Documentary evidence showing that revision on any docu-
ment has ceased does not, then, necessarily signify contentment with the version it
represents, but may simply have been caused by the desire to prevent a surfeit of

49

VOLUME 1

corrections—already mentally prepared but yet to be executed in writing—from
making the document utterly illegible.

That the boundary of the physical source should be open to questioning is of
course also implied by the notion of the text of the work as an immaterial entity.
Does the ﬂuidity of the boundaries of the sources make the concept of the version
untenable? From the point of view of principle, certainly. Clearly in the decisions
about versions the physical documentary source has been privileged beyond what
a rigorous interpretation of the evidence would allow. Equally clearly there is a
practical  need  for  structure  in  the  presentation  of  the  evidence.  It  makes  both
intuitive and practical sense to accept the physical boundaries of the documentary
sources, even if they cannot be more than a convenient aid in a very approximate
reconstruction of the compositional process.

A third problem is presented by the decision to allow manuscript A as a version
of one-ﬁfth of the text. After all, if it is permitted to speak of a version in the case
of an extent of text shorter than the whole text, the number of potential versions
explodes, rendering the concept useless. At the same time, it may be objected that
adhering too strictly to the requirement that a version must be of the entire text
would probably disqualify the majority of documentary sources, since it would be
impossible to decide on what grounds a text could be called entire before it reaches
the state ﬁnally intended by its author. In the case of Worstward Ho, the last para-
graph of the printed text is not added until typescript E, so if the deﬁnition were
too  rigorously  adhered  to,  none  of  the  earlier  documentary  sources  would  be
acceptable as versions.

It has to be admitted, ﬁnally, that all decisions of a methodological nature in the
present work are informed at least as much by pragmaticism as by principle. Ver-
sions appears to be a doubtful notion, both theoretically, and, at least in the case of
Worstward Ho, practically: it requires the physical documentary evidence to be a
great deal more forthcoming than it actually is. At the same time, the texts in their
incarnations in the documentary sources are given. From a practical, if not a prin-
cipled, point of view it makes sense to use them. In the same way, it makes emi-
nent practical sense to regard the abandoned ﬁrst draft of the opening of Worstward
Ho as a version of that opening.

To posit the text of the work as an immaterial entity means also to allow the
editorial emendation of versions of the work found in the sources. Though in

50

INTRODUCTION

principle, given the choice between editorial intrusiveness and editorial reticence,
the latter is greatly to be preferred where the faithful rendition of documentary
sources is concerned—a reticent approach is the least likely to age, or to be con-
troversial—the presence of the full apparatus on the facing page has made it possi-
ble to emend the reading text whenever the evidence conﬂicts with presumed
authorial intention (authorial lapses). Whenever editorial alterations are made in
the surface text of the documentary sources, these are accounted for by the notes.
In view of this continual need to balance the demands of principle and practi-
cability, is it really possible to uphold the pretension of being able to present the
text as intended by the author in any objective sense? The accusation has been
made before that textual editing has too often aspired to an unjustiﬁable degree of
scientiﬁc exactitude. Categorically, the answer must be “No”. Since the copy-text
method involves the exercise of the editor’s subjective judgement in the choice
between  possible  readings,  scientiﬁc  claims  are  out  of  the  question.  However,
there would seem to be equally little justiﬁcation for the reverse position, which is
suspicious of all claims to objectivity. The employment of a transparent method
(and resulting apparatus) that enables editorial decisions to be challenged if the
occasion should arise is surely suﬃcient warranty against undue subjectivity. As
Greg wrote in defense of his method against the prevailing practice of selecting a
single source for the reading text, “it may not be too optimistic a belief that the
judgement of an editor, fallible as it must necessarily be, is likely to bring us closer
to what the author wrote than the enforcement of an arbitrary rule” (p. 26).

Comparison with objective and method of the Garland editions
In 1993 and 1996, respectively, Company (ﬁrst published in 1980) and Ill Seen Ill
Said  (1981)  appeared  as  the  ﬁrst  two  volumes  in  a  series  of  bilingual  variorum
editions of Beckett’s work instigated by Charles Krance and published in the Gar-
land Reference Library of the Humanities (vols 1400 and 1266, respectively [sic]).
The Preface of the former, Samuel Beckett’s Company/Compagnie and A Piece of
Monologue/Solo: A Bilingual Variorum Edition, states that

This initial volume of a projected series of bilingual variorum editions of
Samuel Beckett’s work is intended to serve several purposes. First, it provides
Beckett’s reader of either his English or French texts with a complete range of

51

VOLUME 1

textual variants, which, with the help of the synoptical apparatus, allows the
reader to reconstruct and study the text’s evolution through its various drafts.
Secondly, by aligning the two versions of the texts on matched, face-to-face
pages, it enables the bilingual reader to read both versions “simultaneously”
and comparatively. Thirdly, the fact that both versions are presented with all
available variants makes it possible to pursue, in depth, comparative stylistic
analyses of Beckett’s bilingual oeuvre. (p.ix)

Since the ﬁrst two works of Beckett’s second so-called “three-in-one” have
now appeared in this bilingual variorum series, it makes sense to compare its ob-
jectives  and  method  with  those  of  the  present  edition  of  the  third  work.71  To
begin with, in the case of Worstward Ho there is no French translation by Beckett.
Knowlson quotes Beckett as saying that “I ﬁnd I cannot translate Worstward Ho.
Or with such loss that I cannot bear the thought.”72 The lack of an authorised
French text of Worstward Ho precludes a bilingual edition, and thereby removes
from consideration the second and third of the Garland editions’ main objectives:
the  comparative  study  of  the  French  and  English  texts,  and  the  “comparative
stylistic  analys[i]s”  of  Beckett’s  bilingual  oeuvre  (where  the  latter  is  presumably
regarded as a pursuit that is more general in nature than the comparative study of
the bilingual text of a single work). These two objectives are well served by the
bilingual parallel text of the Garland editions, which makes a practice of signalling
omissions,  additions,  radical  reductions  and  radical  substitutions  which  may  be
observed in the comparison.

The Garland editions’ ﬁrst objective, however, is also the main focus of the
present edition: to allow the user to reconstruct and study the text’s evolution
through its various drafts. Nevertheless, the method of presentation of the variants
is  very  diﬀerent  in  the  present  edition  from  that  in  the  two  Garland  editions.
Where the Garland editions reproduce the variants from all documentary sources
in a single synoptic apparatus, the text of the ﬁve documentary sources are here
presented in full as versions of Worstward Ho. The synoptic apparatus, through its
use of a wide variety of diacritical markings makes the study of the development of
the text possible, but very cumbersome. The diacritical markings are complex—as
is to be expected in view of the complex process of revision through numerous
drafts they must render—and consequently diﬃcult to use.

52

INTRODUCTION

This edition’s second aim, to provide a critical reading text, is not shared by the
Garland series. Instead the Garland editions take an existing text (the published US
version—a  choice  which  is  not  defended)  as  their  reading  text,  which  is  not
emended  on  the  basis  of  documentary  evidence.  The  misspelling  “philo-
genitiveness”, discussed in the introduction above, for example, is not corrected.
Whereas in that instance a case could be made for suggesting that Beckett himself
may have inadvertently changed “philoprogenitiveness” into “philogenitiveness”,
the evidence for the reading of paragraph 6 of Company clearly points towards a
conscious revision on Beckett’s part. The US edition, following Beckett’s type-
script, has:

Yet a certain activity of mind however slight is a necessary adjunct of company.
(p. 9)

As the Garland edition shows, all preceding drafts have “adjunct”. However, the
UK edition reads:

Yet  a  certain  activity  of  mind  however  slight  is  a  necessary  complement  of
company. (p. 11)

And indeed, as the Garland edition notes (p. 67), “complement” was a late change,
introduced by Beckett at proof stage for the UK edition. In the absence of evi-
dence of the  US proofs in the Garland synopsis it is not possible to be entirely
certain that a mistake was not made in the US edition, but the most likely scenario
is that Beckett did not transfer his revision of the UK text to the US page proofs.73
It is a nice illustration—and far from the only one in the publishing history of
Beckett’s work—of the implications of the question whether the author’s copy or
the author’s proofs represent most closely the author’s ﬁnal intention. Again, un-
fortunately Krance does not state the principles on which he bases his choice of
reading text.

The  Garland  bilingual  variorum  editions  are  of  course  very  useful  in  many
ways. Though the synoptic apparatus is diﬃcult to use, they do present translitera-
tions of Beckett’s handwriting. Students of Company and Ill Seen Ill Said owe the
editions a debt of gratitude for that labour alone. The editions have further pro-

53

VOLUME 1

vided a wealth of comparative detail which the editors of the present edition have
been able to draw on. Krance’s analysis of Company, for example, shows Beckett’s
attention to detail in the paucity of changes at the proof-reading stage; in the case
of Worstward Ho, too, Beckett submitted virtually ﬂawless copy.74

The genetic evidence
The primary evidence for the textual genesis is in ﬁve documentary sources: the
draft stages of manuscripts A and B, typescripts C and D, and the ﬁnal text submit-
ted to the publisher, typescript E. Other relevant materials are give in Appendix 1.
These are “The Ceiling”, a text completed at about the time when Worstward Ho
was begun (July–September 1981), which contains thematic material that closely
links it to the ﬁrst manuscript draft of Worstward Ho (published in Arikha, Paris,
1985; MS and TS drafts from Harry Ransom Humanities Research Center, Austin,
Texas); “The Way” (MS and TS drafts from HRHRC, Austin); and notes from one of
Beckett’s “sottisiers” (a small notebook kept at Reading University Library as MS
2901).

Location
MS 2602 in the Beckett Archive at Reading University Library contains the manu-
script drafts (here identiﬁed as manuscripts A and B) and two typescript drafts (C
and D) of Worstward Ho. In 1971 Professor James Knowlson organised an exhibi-
tion on Beckett’s life and writings in the University of Reading library. The occa-
sion was that of Beckett having been awarded the Nobel Prize for literature, and
the  aim  to  provide  “a  modest  tribute  to  a  writer  who  is  now  widely  admired
throughout the world”.75 The exhibition proved the beginning of a personal friend-
ship with Beckett, and the donation of the Worstward Ho manuscripts and type-
scripts occurred in a long series of similar gifts.

Typescript E, a photocopy of the typescript which Beckett submitted for pub-
lication to John Calder, his British publisher, is in the Fond John Calder held by
the Institut Mémoires de l’Edition Contemporaine (IMEC) in Paris. It has no shelf
number; as at July 1997 the archive was not yet catalogued. John Calder, who has
taken up residence in France, donated most of his company’s publishing archive to
IMEC in the early 1990s, when a move to smaller business premises in London
created problems of space.

54

INTRODUCTION

The manuscript
MS  2602  consists  of  21  roughly  A5-sized  sheets  of  manuscript76  torn  out  of  a
spiral-bound graph-paper notebook and two sets of A4-sized typescript. The 21
sheets of manuscript (here referred to as manuscripts A and B) form a single con-
tinuous sequence of (unnumbered) leaves. The ﬁrst 18 sheets measure 14.7 x 21cm;
sheets 19–21 are 17 x 21.9cm. Sheet 18v contains unrelated notes, two brief po-
ems77 and two diagrams for Quad, which dates from the same time (see Appendix
3). Sheet 18 contains later versions of three paragraphs that ﬁrst appear on sheet 17
(the earlier versions are not cancelled). Close inspection of sheet 17 and 18 shows
some small diﬀerences in the positioning of the holes for the spiral binding and the
way the corners are cut compared to the earlier pages, suggesting that they were
possibly torn out of a diﬀerent exercise book by the same manufacturer. Since
without sheet 18 the manuscript would still contain the entire text, it is possible
that sheet 18 was added at a later date. That both sheets 17 and 18 derive from
diﬀerent exercise books is also suggested by the fact that there are no notes on 16v
relating to 17r, or on 17v relating to 18r, as well as by the fact that the notes on 18v
have no connection with Worstward Ho.

The text of the manuscript can be clearly divided into two parts (which, inci-
dentally, do not coincide with the physical diﬀerences between the sheets). The
ﬁrst is a draft of, roughly, the ﬁrst one-ﬁfth of the ﬁnal text. It ends with a thick bar
(varying from 2 to 3 mm) of black over red ink, drawn across the width of the
page, after which the text starts afresh. This ﬁrst draft, dated 9 and 12 August 1981,
covers ﬀ. 1–4 of the ms, plus the ﬁrst paragraph on f. 5r. It will be referred to as
manuscript A. The holograph manuscript which follows it is dated from 20 Sep-
tember 1981 to 17 March 1982 and covers sheets 5–21. It will be referred to as
manuscript B.

 The graph-paper exercise notebooks used for the composition of Worstward
Ho are of the kind Beckett was in the habit of using for his writing. Also custom-
ary is the use to which he put the rectos and versos of the manuscript. The rectos
contain the main text; the versos contain notes of ideas, actual phrases to be in-
serted in the main text, as well as drafts of entire paragraphs, apparently written
either prior to their inclusion in the main text on the opposite recto or, occasion-
ally as an intermediate step between an abandoned ﬁrst draft and the ﬁnal version
on the recto.

55

VOLUME 1

Graphic appearance
The entire base text is written with black ink, presumably from a fountain pen. It
comes in two intensities: a lighter and a darker black, which are distributed roughly
as follows. Folios 1 to 6 (up to and including paragraph 20) use dark black; the
lighter black occurs from folio 6, paragraph 22, right to the end. Within the lighter
black  there  are  stretches  of  darker  black:  from  folio  13,  paragraph  62i,  to  the
middle of paragraph 67 on folio 14 (while in 66.1–3, for example, Beckett again
used the lighter ink), and intermittently on folios 14r, 14v, 15, 16 and 17. The two
shades of ink alternate without any apparent pattern.

Corrections are mostly made in the current shade of black fountain pen. A
limited number of corrections are made in what appears to be a black felt-tipped
pen. Only rarely is a separate correction layer comprising several sentences sug-
gested by the writing utensil used: the felt-tipped pen is unambiguous through-
out, but very rare; the two shades of black are mostly ambiguous.

The ductus changes frequently, but only rarely does it point clearly in the direc-
tion of a correction layer separate from the writing of the main text. In most cases
the ductus is no help therefore in establishing whether the corrections in the mar-
gin were added at a later date or during the same writing session as the main text.
Where it is possible to recognise a separate correction layer (for example in the
case  of  two  marginal  corrections  in  A3),  it  cannot  be  recognised  as  extending
beyond a single paragraph. Graphic evidence is therefore inadequate for the re-
construction of versions of the text below the surface level of the documentary
source. But even the concept of the revision session is a very cumbersome, and to
all  practical  intents  and  purposes  unproductive,  concept  to  use  in  the  case  of
Worstward Ho.

In one place in manuscript A the ductus is especially noteworthy: A8a diﬀers
markedly from that of A1–7 and A9ﬀ. Smaller and neater, it invites speculation on
the circumstances of its composition. Though it has no date of its own, it may
have been written at a diﬀerent time (and in diﬀerent circumstances) from the
surrounding  text.78  A  comparison  may  be  made  with  Beckett’s  handwriting  in
B3–20, which is remarkably even, showing few corrections. It seems safe to as-
sume that in this case the evenness results from greater conﬁdence, since Beckett
was here not primarily composing so much as simply transcribing the text of the
earlier  version,  already  reworked  at  length.  The  same  phenomenon  of  greater

56

INTRODUCTION

evenness of ductus in the second draft may also be observed, for example, in B25ii
compared to the rough draft of B25i. Perhaps in the case of A8a, too, the evenness
reﬂects the nature of Beckett’s attitude to this particular fragment of the text.

The  paragraphing  follows  the  same  pattern  from  the  very  ﬁrst  page  of  the
manuscript to the end: a blank line followed by an indent in the ﬁrst line of the
new  paragraph.  This  is  the  pattern  that  Beckett  followed  from  the  manuscript
down to the last typescript of Worstward Ho (and which was also imitated in the
ﬁrst printed editions in UK and US).

Revision appears heavy at ﬁrst sight. The number of text fragments and para-
graphs  that  are  crossed  out  is  rather  deceptive,  however;  in  fact  the  extent  of
Beckett’s revisions is limited, especially in a qualitative sense, after the transition
from manuscript A to manuscript B. Very occasionally (for example, in the case of
B79a) a paragraph is deleted altogether. More usually, what remains essentially the
same paragraph is simply revised in a process of careful crafting, whittling away at
sentences, and reﬁning of the vocabulary. Sequentially, too, the order of the ﬁrst
holograph remains essentially intact through later drafts, allowing the relatively
straightforward parallel presentation of the subsequent drafts employed in the present
edition without deviating too much from the order in the drafts. Compared to the
complicated genesis of Company and Ill Seen Ill Said, the composition of Worstward
Ho was very straightforward.

The typescripts
The two sets of typescripts included in rul ms 2602 (referred to as C and D) each
contain  the  complete  text;  they  are  untitled  and  bear  no  date.79  Typescript  C
comprises ten pages of A4-sized paper. The ﬁrst four pages bear the watermark
“Extra  Strong”;  the  remainder  “Voiron  [outline  of  shamrock]  Parcheminé
Guérimand”. Typescript D comprises nine pages of A4-sized paper; all with the
watermark “Voiron [outline of shamrock] Parcheminé Guérimand”. Each set is
numbered consecutively, with arabic numerals centred in the head margin. The
typeface is small pica (13 characters per inch). Both sets of typescript contain type-
script revisions and emendations (besides further annotations and corrections in
Beckett’s own hand) of a kind which proves that Beckett was himself the typist.
Typescript  C  has  corrections  made  in  three  types  of  black  pen:  deep  black
fountain pen, lighter black fountain pen and, in two places, felt-tipped pen. As in

57

VOLUME 1

the case of the manuscripts, no pattern of overlay levels becomes evident. Manu-
script revisions in deep black may be revised in deep black or lighter black; revi-
sions in lighter black may be revised in lighter black or deep black, apparently at
random.

The left-hand margins vary between 5 and 6cm, but are mostly around 5.5cm.
The head margin varies between 2.2 and 3.4cm. The foot margins range between
1.7  and  7.8cm.  The  right-hand  margin  varies  greatly—occasionally  the  typing
goes all the way to the edge of the paper. Sheet 5 of typescript C has had a 5.8cm
strip torn oﬀ the bottom; the bottom margin is 2.6cm.

Typescript  D  (nine  sheets  with  a  fold  mark  in  the  middle  of  the  page)  has
corrections made in black ink, and in one or two cases in black felt-tipped pen.
Once again, no pattern suggesting distinct revision levels is apparent. All left-hand
margin settings are identical at about 5.6cm, with the exception of sheet 7, which
is 4.6cm. The top margins vary slightly, ranging between 2 and 3cm. The bottom
margins range between 1.7 and 4.5cm, with the exception of sheet 7, which has
7.5cm. That this deep bottom margin occurs in the same place where, in manu-
script B and typescript C, a caesura occurs (between 80 and 81) may or may not be
a coincidence. But in other ways, too, there is discontinuity at this point.

A remarkable feature of typescript D is the addition in the margin of hand-
written paragraph numbers,80 in black felt-tipped pen, and of abbreviated refer-
ences to the major “actors” in Worstward Ho: “S1, S2, S3” for shades one, two and
three; “D” for the dim light; “V” for the void; “W” for the words, and “B” for
the blanks, by means of a red felt-tipped pen. From sheet 8 (paragraph 81) the
paragraph numbering changes from black felt-tipped pen to black fountain pen
and the identiﬁcation, in red felt-tipped pen, of the main “characters” featuring in
the paragraphs is absent here. Again, the break occurs between paragraph 80 and
81, coinciding with the caesura found in both manuscript B and typescript C.
Certainly the caesura, if intended, is not marked as clearly as it is in B and C.
There is no evidence, for example, that the deep bottom margin could have re-
sulted from a retyping of a heavily revised earlier draft; it shows continuity with
the preceding pages in all regards, including the amount of revision.

Typescript E is a photocopy, of A4 size, made of A4 originals.81 It is undated,
and the extent is eight pages. All paragraphs are indented three characters, identi-
cal to the indents for C and D. Margins are: left 4cm on average, except p. 3,

58

INTRODUCTION

which is 2.7cm; head 2–3cm, except the ﬁrst page, which starts at about 4.5cm;
bottom 2.5–3.5cm, but the ﬁrst page is 4.5 and the last 5cm. Though the loss of
quality resulting from photocopying makes it hard to establish this conclusively,
the typing appears to have been done on the same typewriter as typescripts C and
D. The title is added in capitals at the top of the ﬁrst page, by a hand other than
Beckett’s. The typescript itself is only very lightly revised (though the changes
compared to tyescript D are substantial). Apart from corrections of obvious typing
errors very few substantial revisions are made, those that were made involving no
more than one or two words at a time. Nearly all revision is carried out in type-
script; on very few occasions they are in manuscript. There is no evidence of the
caesura between paragraphs 80 and 81 noted in earlier drafts.

Dates and Places of Composition
Manuscripts A and B together record seven dates of composition. It is not clear
whether each date inscribed actually covers the entire section of MS up to the next
recorded date. If so, the longest section written by Beckett in one session would
be eight manuscript pages. While writing 4800 words in a single session is emi-
nently feasible, Beckett’s track record in this respect, and the nature of this par-
ticular text, make it unlikely. Rather, in his dating Beckett perhaps primarily meant
to record a change of place (each subsequent date records a diﬀerent place, with
the exception of the last two dates, which give Paris like the preceding date) or a
return  to  the  manuscript  after  an  interruption  of  the  writing  process  by  other
activities (the interval between the last two dates is two-and-a-half months).

Beckett wrote the ﬁrst four paragraphs of manuscript A in Paris on 9 August
1981, continuing three days later, on 12 August, in Ussy, where he appears to have
completed the entire ﬁrst, abandoned, draft. Between the time that Beckett gave
up work on the ﬁrst and began work on the second draft at the most eight days
elapsed:  manuscript  B  was  begun  in  Paris  on 20  September  1981.  The  section
dated  20  September  covers  the  same  material  as  the  abandoned  manuscript  A,
now reduced to less than two pages, or about one-third its length in the ﬁrst draft.
Once  the  opening  had  reached  a  satisfactory  form,  work  proceeded  at  longer
intervals: the next date recorded in manuscript B is more than two months later,
Ussy, 27 November 1981, and covers two-and-a-half pages. This is followed by
Paris, 14 December 1981 (the longest section by far: some eight densely written

59

VOLUME 1

pages); Paris, 3 January 1982 (one-and-a-half pages), and then Paris, 17 March
1982, which covers the remaining three pages.

With three biographers stressing the importance of Ussy for Beckett’s writing
as a place to escape the “siege fever” of Paris,82 Anthony Cronin even going so far
as to assert simply that the three texts of Nohow On “were written, like much else
of great beauty, at Ussy, his place of creativity” (p. 573), it is surprising to ﬁnd that
by far the greater part of the manuscript carries Paris as the place of composition.
Of the Nohow On sequence the same goes for Mal vu mal dit, almost three-quarters
of which was written in Paris. Company is a diﬀerent case altogether, since half of
it was composed in Tangier and Stuttgart. Of the remainder a third is marked Paris
and two-thirds Ussy.83

It is possible to date typescripts C, D and E only approximately, on external
evidence. The last date recorded in the manuscript is 17 March 1982, and Beckett
submitted typescript E to John Calder in the Autumn of 1982. The typescripts
therefore date from the period March–September 1982.

The presentation of the transliterations of the documentary sources
The text is in four main draft stages (manuscripts A and B, typescripts C and D)
and the publishers’ copy, typescript E. Each of these ﬁve main stages has been
termed a version of the text of Worstward Ho (see above). They will be presented
as follows. The surface texts of all ﬁve versions are established as critical reading
texts; they will be printed integrally in parallel on the right-hand pages. The notes
detailing the internal genesis of each version, and those accounting for any edito-
rial changes made in establishing the reading texts, are both given on the facing
left-hand pages.

Within the ﬁve main versions, the chronological order of variants has been
established as far as possible, and this order has been rendered in the transliteration
by printing the variants consecutively from left to right.84 The textual evidence is
of composition and revision, with revision in turn dividing into deletion, addi-
tion, replacement and transposition.

By convention, the transliteration of documentary sources includes not only
the actual text found in the source, but also a representation of the “inscriptional
features”:  nature  of  alteration  (deletion,  addition,  substitution);  graphic  aspects
such as changes of writing implement, position of alteration (e.g., interlinear, mar-

60

ginal); and manner of deletion. In the case of Worstward Ho the following catego-
ries of evidence are present:

INTRODUCTION

A. Nature of alterations:

1. Deletion
2. Addition
3. Substitution

B. Writing materials:
1. Manuscript

i. Pen

a. [shade a]
b. [shade b]

ii. Felt-tipped pen

2. Typescript

i. Type
ii. Pen

a. [shade a]
b. [shade b]

iii. Felt-tipped pen

a. [colour a]
b. [colour b]

C. Position of corrections
1. Run on in line
2. Interlinear (usually supralinear)
3. Marginal

i. left margin
ii. right margin
iii. foot margin
iv. head margin
v. on opposite verso

To represent each of these would require a very complicated system of symbols. It

61

VOLUME 1

is worth examining therefore precisely what purposes are served by representing
each in the transliteration. One purpose is purely visual: to render certain aspects
of the physical appearance of the documentary source. But the primary use is, no
doubt, to enable recognition of textual layers of successive changes within the
versions constituted by the documentary sources.

However, as was argued above, the evidence for such layers is insuﬃcient to
establish further versions (states of the—complete—text which the author must
have consciously left in that form for a period of time) within the ﬁve versions
constituted by the transliterated documentary sources. With the primary rationale
for  the  representation  of  the  inscriptional  features  thus  removed,  it  would  not
appear to be productive to represent all of these graphic or inscriptional features.
This edition indicates all non run-on revisions (in eﬀect only insertions and substi-
tutions), and resolves all layered revisions. It does not distinguish between revi-
sions involving supralinear, infralinear or marginal additions, and it does not indicate
the use of various inks and writing utentils. Where non run-on substitutions may
usually be related to speciﬁc deleted words or phrases, it is much harder to be
certain about the nature and extent of run-on corrections. Often a word or phrase
following a deleted segment of text in-line can be regarded as a replacement of the
deleted text, but equally often it constitutes less a replacement of text that is in
some sense equivalent than a new departure, an attempt to move forward where
the abandoned phrasing had failed. Substitutions not involving non run-on inser-
tions are therefore not speciﬁcally marked; but whenever they are encountered
they can be dated with certainty to the writing stage.

As regards the object of conveying a sense of the graphic layout of the source,
the advantage of achieving that in any detail is amply outweighed by the disadvan-
tages of the resulting proliferation of cryptic diacritic symbols. The edition there-
fore conﬁnes itself to indicating the position of all transliterated text (including
notes) on the manuscript and typescript leaves through the use of page numbers.
In the case of the manuscripts folio numbers are given a recto and verso indica-
tion, since Beckett used the versos for notes and drafts; the versos of typescript
leaves are always left blank.

To facilitate cross-referencing between versions, a numbering system identify-
ing all paragraphs (and their various revision levels) and sentences has been de-
vised. The versions are identiﬁed by their sigla, the capital letters A–E. Paragraphs

62

INTRODUCTION

are numbered 1–96, following the published text. When the same paragraph oc-
curs within one MS or TS at diﬀerent revision levels, the consecutive levels have
been distinguished by the addition of ascending lowercase roman numerals (fol-
lowing the version sigla and paragraph number) thus: C12i, C12ii. Sentences are
again numbered in arabic numerals, with a full stop separating paragraph and sen-
tence numbers: A4.8; C12i.1; C12ii.2, etc.

Paragraphs in the drafts that do not occur in the ﬁnal text are given the same
identiﬁcation as the preceding paragraph, with the addition of a lowercase letter
from a to d: for example, B8a follows B8, and B25a follows B25i and B25ii, which
are two drafts of B25. Similarly, individual sentences in the drafts that do not occur
in the ﬁnal text are identiﬁed by the number of the preceding sentence that does
occur in the ﬁnal text, with the addition of a lowercase letter from a to z: e.g.,
D49.10a follows D49.10. Conversely, where sentences occur in the ﬁnal version
that do not occur in a draft version, the numbers are followed by “[-]” in the
transliteration of the surface text of that version (but not in the earlier revision
levels). When two (or more) sentences in any version are joined together in the
ﬁnal printed text, the draft sentences are all assigned the same sentence number.
When, as happens rarely, a change in sequential ordering of paragraphs occurs, the
order in which the paragraphs are given is always that of the printed text. A change
of order is accounted for in an editorial note, and the paragraphs in question are
printed in italics to indicate that the order in which they appear deviates from the
source. Sentences within paragraphs are always left in the order in which they appear
in the source, the sentence numbers identifying the sequence of the printed edition.
The numbering system enables fast navigation between versions and allows the
reader to see at a glance which sentences were deleted, added or revised from draft
to  draft.  Identiﬁcation  of  correspondences  between  individual  sentences  across
drafts was straightforward, the material resisting the systematic numbering only
occasionally. An example of the sort of complications that occurred and the con-
siderations  behind  the  solutions  chosen  may  be  found  in  the  treatment  of  the
numbering of A–E8.4. The ﬁnal text here reads “Too much to hope”:

Know nothing no. Too much to hope. At most mere minimum. (E8.3–5)

C and D are almost identical, reading:

63

VOLUME 1

Know nothing no. Not yet. At most the minimum. (C8.3–5)
Know nothing no. Not yet. At most mere minimum (D8.3–5)

B does not give the section at all, while A has:

Know nothing no not now. Not here. Not yet. The minimum. (A8.3–5)

Identiﬁcation of 8.3 and 8.5 across all versions oﬀers no diﬃculty. However, it
might be suggested that “[not now.] Not here. Not yet” (in A) and “Not yet” (in
B and C) bear little relation to “Too much to hope” in the ﬁnal text. It was ﬁnally
decided to identify the phrases from A and C as preﬁgurations of D8.4 and E8.4
for two reasons. In the ﬁrst place all present the same step in the same reasoning
process; their position in the narrative is the same. Secondly, on a more philo-
sophical level, all variations concerned could be regarded as contrasting the situa-
tion in the narrative with an ideal situation which is not now, not here and not
yet, and possibly too much to hope for altogether in the narrator’s sublunar con-
ditions.

While  establishing  correlations  between  sentences  was  relatively  straightfor-
ward, and the correspondences suggested are not, it is hoped, in themselves mis-
leading,  the  numbering  system  should  certainly  not  be  taken  as  absolute;  it  is
intended to aid navigation rather than to identify or suggest equivalence of ex-
pressions. It is hoped that the advantage of ready reference across drafts outweighs
the possible disadvantage of undue teleological readings, which could impede a
fully open-minded approach to the earlier drafts in their own right.85 The num-
bering system was devised for Worstward Ho, but has been applied also to “Ceil-
ing” and “The Way”. A comparison between the ease with which correspondences
suggested themselves nearly always across all drafts of Worstward Ho with the greater
diﬃculty encountered in the ﬁrst drafts of “Ceiling” suggests the greater strain of
the composition of the latter (also perhaps demonstrated by the larger number of
manuscript drafts).

Beckett  made  use  of  the  left-hand  pages  of  the  manuscript  sheets  from  his
exercise book mainly for notes towards the main text on the right-hand pages.
Occasionally he marked text on the left-hand page for insertion into the main
text. In the latter case the text has been treated no diﬀerently from text on the

64

INTRODUCTION

right-hand page; it is coded as material to be inserted and been included in the
numbering system described above. The notes, which may range from a single
word to an entire paragraph or even several paragraphs, are included in the edito-
rial headnote to the relevant paragraph on the facing page (usually the one imme-
diately across from it on the same horizontal plane; very rarely to a thematically or
verbally more relevant adjacent paragraph). No attempt has been made to include
these notes in the numbering system.

Editorial intrusions
Editorial emendations and doubtful readings have been indicated by the use of
editorial italic square brackets. For example, in the phrase

Where no [xxxxx] [more?]. (A5.30)

the two sets of brackets represent an indecipherable word of roughly ﬁve letters
(“xxxxx” enclosed in editorial italic square brackets), followed by a doubtful read-
ing of a word which looks like “more” (“more” followed by an italic question
mark, the whole enclosed in italic square brackets).

The following have been silently emended in the transliteration of the surface

text of the TSs:

(1) Purely mechanical typing errors corrected by Beckett, whether during typ-
ing in-line, by marginal typing or in handwriting, have not been transliterated.
For example, in the phrase “Till sick of there” (D5.15) the omission of a space
after “till”, resulting in the error “Tills”, is corrected by Beckett x-ing out the s,
followed by the required space and the word “still”. In “Back of black outercoat
cut oﬀ midthigh” (D25.10), “oﬀ” is ﬁrst spelled “oﬀf”, which is x-ed out and
replaced by the run-on correction “oﬀ”. Where Beckett typed too far into the
right-hand margin he sometimes cancelled an unﬁnished word. In all these cases
only the ﬁnal correct text has been shown.

Whenever there was the slightest doubt whether a run-on correction was of a
typing error or represented a change of mind, the correction is documented. In
the sentence “No but to now this now that alone” (D67.2), for example, “that” is
typed ﬁrst with (presumably) a full stop. The run-on correction gives “that” with-
out a full stop and followed by the word “alone”. Beckett’s run-on emendation

65

VOLUME 1

could either represent his correction of a typing error or an editorial revision, and
so the correction has been documented. Similarly, in the sentence “No saying
what it all is they somehow say” (D58.15), Beckett’s typing “it” for “is” is not
regarded as a mechanical typing error, and has been documented.

(2) Where necessary, spaces have been added or deleted; for example “missay”
has been changed a number of times into “worse say” by the deletion of “mis” and
the supralinear addition of “worse”; here the spacing has been adjusted silently.
(3) Double full stops, caused by the supply of a fresh full stop with inserted text
where the full stop belonging to the cancelled text was not deleted, have been
rendered as single ones.

(4) Capitals to lowercase characters and vice versa in such cases as a change in
word  order  resulting  in  the  initial  word  of  a  sentence  moving  to  a  non-initial
position.
(In many of the cases of editorial emendation listed the precise form of the text in
the source may be reconstructed from the synoptic transliteration in the notes on
the left-hand page. A full list of diacritical markings and symbols used may be
found preceding the transliterations.)

The reading text
Typescript E, the copy of Worstward Ho which Beckett submitted to John Calder
for the UK edition serves as the copy-text for the present reading text. It will be
necessary  to  collate  it  with  the  two  published  editions  of  Worstward  Ho  (John
Calder for the UK and Grove Press for the US; both 1983), since there are some
textual diﬀerences between the UK and US published editions.86 Both editions were
published in the same month, April 1983. This presents the question which of
these two simultaneous English-language publications is the more authoritative or
reliable. The inventory in Table 1 lists all variant readings found in a close com-
parison between the two published texts, together with the reading in typescript E
of the same sentences.

59.24
61.19

Typescript E
Worse in -
Say that best
worse.

UK editions
Worst in—
Say that best
worst.

US editions
Worse in—
Say that best
worse.

66

INTRODUCTION

71.13

75.7
76.6

86.15

Unstillable vain
last of longing
still.
The said.

Unstillable vain Unstillable vain
last of longing
least of longing
still.
still.
The said?
The said.
When if not
When if not once? When if not once.
once.
If then not that If then not that
much more
then that much
less then?

If then not that
much more than much more then
that much less
then?

that much less
then?

Table 1. A comparison of the copy-text of Worstward Ho with the published editions.

The most obvious ﬁnding is that the Grove Press edition is identical with type-
script E. A comparison between the published texts and the copy-text yields no
other discrepancies. Though it has not been possible to trace the actual copy for
the Grove Press edition, it is therefore safe to assume that the edition was typeset
from a copy (whether photocopy or carbon copy) of typescript E. The conclusion
that suggests itself most readily is that, while the Grove Press edition follows E
faithfully,  the  Calder  edition  is  corrupt.  However,  John  Calder  insists  that  any
discrepancies between Beckett’s copy and his edition would have resulted from
corrections or revisions made by Beckett while reading the proofs,87 and there are
suﬃcient documented earlier instances of corrections made by Beckett in the proofs
for British editions of his works which did not ﬁnd their way into the US editions
to accept the likelihood of Calder’s claim.88 Unfortunately, no trace has been found
of the author’s proofs for either edition, and Calder’s claim cannot be veriﬁed
from direct evidence.

The documentary sources provide some indirect evidence; however, it is not
unequivocal. In half of the cases the documentary evidence appears to support the
Calder readings; in the other half it appears to support Grove Press (see Table 2).

[59.23]
59.24

Manuscript B
[Worst in need of
worsening.] Of - worse.] Of -

Typescript C
[Worst in need of

Typescript D
[Worst in need of
worse.] Worst
in—

67

VOLUME 1

61.19

71.13

75.7
76.6

86.15

Say that best
worse.
Unstillable vain
last of longing
still.
The said?

Say that best
worse.
Unstillable vain
last of longing
still.
The said?

Say that best
worst.
Unstillable vain
last of longing
still.
The said?
Those crippled When if not once? When if not once?
hands when if
not once?
If then not that
If then not that
much more then much more then
that much less
then?

If then not that
much more than
that much less
then?

that much less
then?

Table 2. A comparison of the unpublished drafts of Worstward Ho.

In the case of 59.24, 75.7 and 76.6 the documentary evidence clearly supports the
Calder text, and suggests that Beckett, having slipped up in typescript E, provided
the corrections in proof. The reading of “Worst” in 59.24 is not only supported by
typescript D, but is also implied by the text of B and C: the single word “Of”
implies “Worst in need of”. The case for the question marks in 75.7 and 76.6 is
obvious. If this hypothesis, of Beckett having provided corrections at the proof
stage, is correct, the remaining discrepancies between the Calder edition on the
one hand, and typescript E and the Grove Press edition on the other should be
capable of being explained in a way that does not oppose it.

In 86.15 it is plausible in view of the history of the phrase detailed in tables 1
and 2 (with “than” making a single appearance in typescript D) that Beckett him-
self was confused between two possible readings of his own very elliptic sentence:
placing a putative comma variously after more (which would result in the “then”
reading) and after that (to give the “than” reading). It is also just conceivable that
than in the Calder edition represents an editorial “correction”; however, in view
of the nature of the text as a whole this must be rejected as unlikely. Surely if an
editor had been moved to make this change, he would hardly have left unchal-
lenged a sentence like “But but a shade so as when after nohow somehow on to
dimmer still”.

68

INTRODUCTION

In 61.19 and 71.13, however, the  US readings of worse and last, respectively,
would appear to be better supported by the documentary evidence. It is true that
the ﬁrst time Beckett wrote down 61.19 in manuscript B he did use the phrase
“Say that best worst”, and it is conceivable that he went back to it when correct-
ing the proofs. However, in the case of 71.13 the reading of the UK edition seems
to be inappropriate, and an unnoticed typesetter’s error would appear to be the
only explanation.

The  hypothesis  just  examined  entails  that  the  Grove  Press  edition  was  not
corrupt, in the sense that it conformed fully to Beckett’s typescript, and that the
Calder edition was authorised in the sense that it contains Beckett’s own revisions
in proof. The alternative hypothesis is that, while the Grove Press edition, con-
forming fully to the typescript, was authorised, the Calder edition either suﬀered
at the hands of a copy-editor, resulting in deliberate, if misguided changes, or was
simply corrupt, in the sense that mistakes crept in unnoticed. It has already been
argued that the involvement of a copy-editor is possible, but implausible, in view
not only of the nature of the changes made, which are not those a copy-editor is
likely to have made, but also—and more signiﬁcantly—of the changes not made.
That the Calder readings resulted from simple corruption is equally implausible,
in  view  of  the  sense  made  by  the  majority  of  the  Calder  readings:  they  could
hardly have been arrived at by poor typesetting or any other scenario based on
chance alone.

If the former hypothesis is accepted as the more likely scenario, also in view of
the practices of the two publishers involved referred to above, and if the Calder
readings for 59.24, 75.7 and 76.6 are consequently undisputed, a decision still has
to  be  made  about  the  remaining  three:  61.19,  71.13,  and  86.15.  The  reading
“Unstillable vain last of longing still” in 71.13 has the beneﬁt of being supported
overwhelmingly by the documentary evidence, but is also clearly, in combination
with  the  word  “still”,  semantically  to  be  preferred  over  “least”.  The  editorial
choice in 86.15 for “If then not that much more then that much less then?” is
backed—most importantly—by the ﬁrst manuscript, when Beckett actually ﬁrst
composed the sentence, as well as by the ﬁrst typescript. It is further conﬁrmed by
a close reading of the sentence and its relation to the paragraph’s argument. The
phrase “that much more” occurs as a meaningful unit three times (in sentences 5,
9  and  15).  “That  much  less”  varies  it,  and  therefore  cannot  be  divided;  if  an

69

VOLUME 1

imaginary comma is added to the phrase to disambiguate it, that comma must be
read after “more”.

In the context of the paragraph as a whole, the reading “Say that best worse” in
61.19 comes out as the preferred one. It is supported by the last three of the four
relevant sources, but more importantly, looking at the paragraph as a whole, “best
worse” is simply the sixth repetition of the same phrase; “best worst” does not
occur anywhere else in the paragraph, or even in Worstward Ho as a whole. For the
same reason, it is suggested to emend the reading worser worst (in typescript E and
both printed editions) in 61.21 to “worser worse”, a reading also found in the
previous two sources (C and D).

70

NOTES TO THE INTRODUCTION

1 In his recent “The Termination of His Solitaire: A Textual Error in Murphy” (JOBS, vol. 6, no 1
[1997], pp. 135–36) Declan Kiely merely adds one further instance to a long list of known errors.
2 Probably the earliest of the educational editions was Colin Duckworth’s edition of En attendant
Godot (London, 1966). In 1978, for example, James Knowlson published a bilingual edition of
Happy Days / Oh les beaux jours incorporating, “with Becketts’ permission, much new material
from the author’s manuscript production notebooks and includes changes made for Beckett’s own
Schiller Theater Werkstatt production and for the National Theatre in London” (cover blurb).
3 New York, 1995. Despite his obvious interest in textual matters (witness also his monograph
Beckett’s Happy Days: A Manuscript Study of 1977 and his volume on Endgame in The Theatrical
Notebooks of Samuel Beckett series (1992), as well as several articles on related subjects), Gontarski has
not published a critical text edition.
4 Richard Ellmann, James Joyce, rev. and corr. edn, 1983, p. 649; Knowlson, Damned to Fame, p. 99.
According to Geert Lernout, “there is absolutely no evidence whatsoever, neither in the drafts and
manuscripts, nor in the notebooks, of Beckett’s handwriting. Until new evidence is produced, the
story of Beckett-the-secretary is apocryphal and should be laid to rest” (“James Joyce and
Fritz Mauthner and Samuel Beckett”, in In Principle, Beckett Is Joyce, ed. Friedhelm Rathjen,
Edinburgh, 1994).
5 See, for example, Knowlson, Damned to Fame, p. 352. For a fuller discussion of the events that led
to this turning point in Beckett’s writing career, see Vol. 2, Chapter 3, “Roots”.
6 See the account of the publication history of Worstward Ho below.
7 RUL  MSS 2935⁄4⁄1 and 2935⁄4⁄2 show that “whenceabouts” is indeed what Beckett intended.
8 “Less Is More: Developing Ambiguity in the Drafts of Come and Go”, in Make Sense Who May,
ed. Robin J. Davis and Lance St John Butler, Gerrards Cross, 1988, pp. 11–19; at p. 16.
9 In “The Company Beckett Keeps: The Shape of Memory and One Fablist’s Decay of Lying”
Enoch Brater quotes a letter of Samuel Beckett to Martha Fehsenfeld, 18 November 1980, to that
eﬀect (in Humanistic Perspectives, p. 163, n. 5). It is corrected in the US, but not in the UK edition of
Nohow On.
10 See the description of all documentary sources by Charles Krance in Samuel Beckett’s Company/
Compagnie and A Piece of Monologue/Solo: A Bilingual Variorum Edition, New York and Lon-
don, 1993, p. 122.
11 Ill Seen Ill Said, p. 40.
12 An earlier draft of this section was published as “Worsening in Worstward Ho: A Brief Look at the
Genesis of the Text”, in Samuel Beckett Today/Aujourd’hui no 6 (1997), pp. 243–50.
13 Richard Seaver, “Beckett and Merlin”, in On Beckett, ed. S.E. Gontarski, New York, 1986, pp.
26–27.
14 Dated manuscript and undated typescript drafts of “Ceiling” (originally titled “On coming to”)
in the Carlton Lake Collection, Harry Ransom Humanities Research Center (HRHRC), Austin,
Texas. “Ceiling” was ﬁrst published in Arikha, Paris, Hermann, 1985. It is missing from the Com-
plete Short Prose 1929–1989 (New York, 1995), edited by S.E. Gontarski.
15 Charles Juliet, Conversations with Samuel Beckett and Bram van Velde, ed. Adriaan van der Weel and
Ruud Hisgen, Leiden, 1995, p. 157.
16 It may be observed that the whole notion that words might be being said gradually gives way in

71

VOLUME 1

the course of the narrative to a “soft of mind” oozing “ooze”, which is not likely to be associated
with the production of much sound.
17 Essentially the same phrase occurs centrally in part two (“∞”) of “The Way”, where it indicates
timelessness (see Appendix 1; cf also “Throughout this confrontation the sun stands still. That is to
say the earth.” in Ill Seen Ill Said, paragraph 43, p. 45.
18 Manuscripts and typescripts in the Carlton Lake Collection, HRHRC.
19 In No Symbols Where None Intended (Austin, Texas, 1984) Carlton Lake observes the same phe-
nomenon in the consecutive draft versions of “Ceiling”: “Beckett experiments with the format of
the piece, regrouping sentences into smaller paragraphs and periodically inserting—in accordance
with his instructions to himself in the ﬁrst autograph draft—the word ‘on’” (p. 170).
20 This say–see nexus is discussed in Vol. 2, Chapter 1, “Argument”.
21 In this respect, the MS evidence of Worstward Ho may be contrasted with Paul Davies’ view of the
MSs of Stirrings Still. Davies makes the point that the printed text has an almost accidental form.
(Paul Davies, “Stirrings Still: The Disembodiment of Western Tradition”, in The Ideal Core of the
Onion, ed. John Pilling and Mary Bryden, Reading, 1992, pp. 136–51.) This is inconceivable in
the case of Worstward Ho, which moves ineluctably from its opening to its conclusion.
22 Stirrings Still was written (c. 1987), and published (1988) after Worstward Ho, but it is shorter, and
more limited in scope.
23 Quoted in Enoch Brater, Beyond Minimalism: Beckett’s Late Style in the Theater, OUP, 1987, p. 176.
24 To Brian Finney in answer to a questionnaire; see Brian Finney, Since How It Is: A Study of
Samuel Beckett’s Later Fiction, London, 1972, p. 10.
25 From a letter to Alan Schneider, quoted by Knowlson, Damned to Fame, p. 677.
26 André Bernold, Amitiés de Beckett, Paris, 1992, quoted by Anthony Cronin, Samuel Beckett: The
Last Modernist, London, 1996, p. 572.
27 Harvard Book Review, Winter and Spring Books 1989, nos 11 and 12, pp. 1–2; quoted by Brater
in The Drama in the Text: Beckett’s Late Fiction, OUP, 1994, p. 145; “the writing is over” is also
quoted by Brian Finney in “Still Stirring to Be Still”, JOBS, New Series, Vol. I, nos 1 and 2, pp.
129–35, on p. 129.
28 MS letter card, 28 February 1982, in HRHRC, ﬁle no 12186.
29 MS picture postcard, 9 August 1983, ibid.
30 In HRHRC, ﬁle no 10711.
31 MS picture postcard, Paris, 16.12.83, in HRHRC, ﬁle no 12100. The notion of Worstward Ho as
a “ﬁnal point” in Beckett’s oeuvre is further discussed in Vol. 2.
32 Interview with John Calder, Paris, 15–16 July 1997.
33 Uncatalogued carbon copy of a letter dated 27 October 1982, Calder Papers, IMEC, Paris. Calder’s
use of the exclamation mark in Beckett’s title is not surprising in view of the obvious echo of
Charles  Kingsley’s  Westward  Ho!.  In  a  letter  dated  30  November  1982  Calder  acknowledges  a
request by Beckett to remove the exclamation mark (uncatalogued carbon copy, Calder Papers,
IMEC, Paris).
34 No proofs, corrected or otherwise, have been located.
35 “Review List”, Calder Papers, IMEC, Paris.
36 It was initially announced in the list of “New Books January–August 1983” in The Bookseller no
4025, 12 February 1983. In issue 4039 of 21 May Worstward Ho is listed as having appeared “4.83”.
In a letter to Beckett of 26 April John Calder writes that “Worstward Ho is out this week” (IMEC);
the actual date may be found in a note in red pen added to the Review List, kept in the Calder

72

INTRODUCTION

Papers at IMEC.
37 US publication is announced in Publishers Weekly 223, 5 (4 February 1983).
38 No refusals are documented in Beckett’s writing career after Jerôme Lindon’s enthusiastic re-
sponse to Molloy for Les Éditions de Minuit in 1950 (see Cronin’s account of the publication of
Molloy in Samuel Beckett, pp. 409–13).
39 One reviewer (Ralph Flores, in World Literature Today vol. 59, no 2 [Spring 1985], pp. 273–74;
on p. 273) commented that Worstward Ho was “short and in large print (as if the reader, by now,
were growing blind and senile)”. In the New Yorker an anonymous reviewer singled out the “forty-
one small pages of very large type” for mention in his very brief review (60, 26 March 1984, p. 133).
40 The shortness of Beckett’s work has been an issue to many reviewers. Alan Jenkins opened his
review of Stirrings Still and Nohow On in the TLS of 10 March 1989 with this observation: “For
years, books about Samuel Beckett have been considerably longer (as well as more plentiful) than
books by him. Now even a shortish review risks looking a bit self-indulgent. Stirrings Still goes on
stirring for just over 1500 words ...”
41 Worstward Ho is reviewed alongside Disjecta: Miscellaneous Writings and a Dramatic Fragment (ed.
Ruby Cohn, John Calder, 1983) and A Samuel Beckett Reader (ed. John Calder, Picador, 1983), TLS,
10 February 1984, p. 135.
42 The Cambridge Quarterly, vol. 15, no 1 (1986), pp. 13–32, on p. 14.
43 22 May 1983, p. 30.
44 Anecdote told by Gerry Dukes, Leiden, March 1995.
45 There was initially some misunderstanding regarding Worstward Ho’s status on the part of Jerôme
Lindon, who assumed it to be the English translation of an existing French text (correspondence
between Jerôme Lindon and John Calder, 25 April–4 May, IMEC, Paris).
46 Knowlson, Damned to Fame,  p. 827, n.4.
47 Knowlson, Damned to Fame,  p. 827, n.4.
48 The German translation, by Erika Tophoven (Aufs Schlimste zu, Frankfurt/Main, 1989), was also
made without the beneﬁt of Beckett’s assistance, generously lent in the case of all earlier German
translations made by Elmar and Erika Tophoven since 1953.
49 It was reviewed by Nigel Andrew in The Listener, 11 August 1983, p. 26.
50 In this transgression of the boundaries of genre, which Beckett in principle tended to adhere to
quite strictly, Neumann apparently enjoyed a fair amount of Beckett’s trust: “Neumann’s bold
interpretations of Beckett’s prose works are bolstered by the author’s approval. Beckett gave him
Mercier and Camier in 1978, Company in 1980, and Worstward Ho in 1985” (review by Stephen
Dilks, The Beckett Circle, vol. 18, no 2 [Fall 1996], pp. 1–2).
51 John Banville, “The Last Word”, New York Review of Books, Vol. XXXIX, no 14 (13 August
1992), p. 20.
52 Beckett supplying the title becomes especially signiﬁcant in view of his refusal either to think of
a title himself or to approve of titles suggested by his publishers in the case of the earlier “3-in-1”
(the appellation is Beckett’s own): “Not ‘Trilogy’, I beseech you, just the three titles and nothing
else”, Beckett wrote to John Calder in reply to a request to be allowed to use “Trilogy” as the
volume’s general title. The trilogy nature of both the ﬁrst and the second sequence of three Beckett
novels to receive that appellation is discussed at some length by S.E. Gontarski in his Introduction
to Nohow On, 1996, pp. vii–xiv. Gontarski also supplies the quotation from Beckett’s letter.
53 Notably, the TLS (10 February 1984, and 10 March 1989); London Review of Books (16 June 1983
and 9 November 1989); the New York Times Book Review (18 December 1983 and 26 May 1996).

73

VOLUME 1

54 From a letter to Barney Rossett, quoted by S.E. Gontarski in his Introduction to Nohow On, p. xii.
55 Gontarski narrates how, Beckett having narrowly succeeded in persuading his British and American
publishers to publish the one-volume 1959 edition of the three novels under the title of Three
Novels followed by the three titles, the Olympia Press edition of the same year appeared as Molloy,
Malone Dies, The Unnamble: A Trilogy.
56 Jerome J. McGann, Critique of Modern Textual Criticism, Chicago, 1983, p. 81.
57 See the introductions to Samuel Beckett’s Company/Compagnie and A Piece of Monologue/
Solo: A Bilingual Variorum Edition, and Samuel Beckett’s Mal vu mal dit/Ill Seen Ill Said: A Bilingual,
Evolutionary and Synoptic Variorum Edition, ed. Charles Krance, New York and London, 1996, and
the  introduction  to  S.E.  Gontarski’s  The  Intent  of  Undoing  in  Samuel  Beckett’s  Dramatic  Texts,
Bloomington (1985), for further reasons for studying the textual genesis of Beckett’s work.
58 A distinction made by G. Thomas Tanselle in his analysis of the current theoretical positions in
textual scholarship (“The Varieties of Scholarly Editing”, in Scholarly Editing: A Guide to Research,
ed. D.C. Greetham, New York, 1995, pp. 9–31; quotation at p. 10). Tanselle’s article is one of the
most limpid and cogently argued current discussions of the variety of approaches available to the
textual editor.
59 Little has been written on Beckett’s relations with his publishers; the consensus appears to be that
little or no editing took place, certainly towards the end of his career. Richard Seaver later com-
mented on his involvement with the publication of Watt: “As is always the case with Beckett
manuscripts, Watt was in impeccable condition. Although we proofread it, we found virtually
nothing even to query, much less change.” (Richard Seaver, “Beckett and Merlin”, in On Beckett,
ed. S.E. Gontarski, New York, 1986, p. 24. John Fletcher comments in his Introduction to his
edition of Fin de partie (1970) that “Beckett is a most conscientious artist, who prunes, polishes and
reﬁnes each work with great care before releasing it for publication” (p. 10).
60 Though the concept of authorial intention “raises diﬃcult theoretical and practical questions and
especially in recent years has provoked much debate” (William Proctor Williams and Craig S.
Abbott, An Introduction to Bibliographical and Textual Studies, 2nd edn, New York, 1989, p. 57), the
case of Worstward Ho is mercifully straightforward. The only possible doubt about Beckett’s autho-
rial intention—leaving aside the larger issue of Worstward Ho’s place in any putative trilogy—is that
thrown by the existence of two marginally variant ﬁrst editions in the us and uk. On the implica-
tions and potential causes see below.
61 In Studies in Bibliography, Vol. 3 (1950–1951), pp. 19–36.
62 In Greetham (ed.) Scholarly Editing, p. 22.
63 The convenient conventional distinction between substantives (words) and accidentals (spelling,
punctuation, capitalisation, and such) is not applicable in the case of Beckett, to whom “accidentals”
did not exist.
64 The case of electronic imaging is similar, in practice if not in theory. See Peter Robinson, The
Digitization of Primary Textual Sources, Oxford, 1993. Robinson cites the distinction made by the
Bibliothèque nationale de France between archival and transmissive quality, where archival quality
is capable of replacing the original, while transmissive quality is adequate for most scholarly pur-
poses. The criteria for archival quality tend to be too strict to be practicable in the current state of
technology.
65 Type facsimile is capable of solving this to some extent, but can do so well only in combination
with facsimile reproduction. While very useful for representing the graphic appearance of a single
source in print, type facsimile also presents an obstacle to the easy comparison between various

74

INTRODUCTION

sources, since lines and pages would rarely run parallel.
66 The purpose of showing the authenticity of the diary in the face of allegations by Nazi sympa-
thisers motivated the editors of Anne Frank’s Diary (Amsterdam, 1986), for example, to give the
full text of draft versions.
67 See below for the motivation for assigning a separate sigla to A.
68 The following discussion owes much to Maritha Mathijsen, Naar de letter: Handboek editiewetenschap
(Assen, 1995), and Tanselle, op. cit.
69 In the hand press period correction on the press is a complicating factor. Correction on the press
results in “states”, i.e., parts of a print-run featuring a diﬀerent reading as a result of the fact that an
error was corrected only part-way through the printrun. Though theoretically still possible today
in the case of letterpress printing (and the ﬁrst UK edition of Worstward Ho was indeed printed in
letterpress), it is exceptionally rare in twentieth-century letterpress printing practice, and virtually
impossible in the case of oﬀset lithography, the prevalent printing method since the 1970s.
70 The distinction is an important one to Tanselle in “The Varieties of Scholarly Editing”.
71 A proposal put forward by the present editors for a companion volume of Worstward Ho was
accepted by the series editor and editorial board, but the Estate of Samuel Beckett subsequently
stipulated that the volume, not being of a bilingual text, should appear last in the series, which
intends to include all of Beckett’s bilingual works.
72 Knowlson, Damned to Fame, pp. 684–85, note 827. Beckett found self-translating a necessary evil
at the best of times. It is rumoured that at one stage Beckett did make an attempt, of less than a
page in length. This page is supposed to be in the possession of Edith Fournier, who knew Beckett,
and eventually translated Worstward Ho into French for Beckett’s French publisher, Les Éditions de
Minuit. Some French phrases occur at one point in the margin of the Worstward Ho manuscript,
but  apart  from  “[Bras?]  vacants”,  which  might  conceivably  translate  “empty  hands”,  they  are
unfortunately illegible.
73 According to John Calder (interview, Paris, 15–16 July 1997), it is possible that Beckett did not
always correct proofs for his US editions. There are numerous other changes made in the proofs for
the UK edition.
74 Mal vu mal dit has more revisions in proof; it might be interesting to investigate to what extent
this observation extends to other works originally composed in French.
75 James Knowlson, in Samuel Beckett: An Exhibition Held at Reading University Library, May to July
1971 (London, 1971), p. 15. See also the account of the origin and development of the Beckett
Archive at Reading by James Knowlson, “The Beckett Archive”, in Beckett at Eighty: A Celebra-
tion, Reading, 1986.
76  It  is  proposed  to  reserve  the  term  manuscript  for  handwritten  material  to  distinguish  it  from
typewritten material. All manuscripts discussed are autographs.
77 One of the poems, “ashes burning”, also occurs in the “sottisier”, RUL  MS 2901; see Appendix
1. The catalogue Beckett at Reading (Reading, 1998) calls them the “Worstward Ho poems”.
78 See “Dates and Places of Composition” below for a further discussion of the relation between
writing sessions and dating.
79 As Richard L. Admussen has noted, Beckett did not usually date his typescripts (The Samuel
Beckett Manuscripts: A Study, Boston, 1979, pp. 10-11).
80 Paragraph numbering is also found in the Mal vu mal dit notebook (MS 2903), where it serves the
purpose of allowing Beckett to refer to connections between paragraphs, etcetera. In 75.10 of
typescript D Beckett uses his paragraph numbering similarly to refer to another occurrence of the

75

VOLUME 1

phrase “as good as”, in 86.8.
81  It  may  well  have  been  the  originals  which  were  put  up  for  auction  by  Sotheby’s  in  1991.
Attempts at determining the fate of the original typescript have proved unsuccessful.
82 Knowlson, Damned to Fame, pp. 388-90 and passim; Beckett uses the expression in a letter to
Jocelyn Herbert, 12 June 1972, quoted in Knowlson, Damned to Fame, p. 595.
83 See Charles Krance, ed., Company/Compagnie, p. 121 and Mal vu mal dit/Ill Seen Ill Said, pp. 130–31.
84 No attempt has been made to render revision levels extending over the full length of a version;
as was explained above (in “The concept of versions”), the documentary evidence does not allow
such revision levels to be recognised beyond the extent of at most a single paragraph.
85  It  may  be  noted  again  that  the  device  of  paragraph  numbering  was  applied  ﬁrst  by  Beckett
himself, in typescript D.
86 The same diﬀerences are repeated exactly in the two subsequent editions of Worstward Ho, in the
trilogy Nohow On (with Company and Ill Seen Ill Said) by the same publishers (John Calder, 1989 and
1992—which is identical with the Limited Editions Club edition of 1989—and Grove  Press, 1996).
87 Interview with John Calder, Paris, 15–16 July 1997.
88 See S.E. Gontarski’s “Notes on the Texts” in his edition of The Complete Short Prose 1929–1989,
pp. 279–86.

76

THE TEXT

HEADNOTE TO THE TRANSLITERATIONS
Since the diﬀerences between typescript E and the reading text are minimal, the
reading text is not separately printed; it can be simply constructed by emending
the surface text of typescript E as proposed in the notes to E59.24, E61.19, E71.13,
E75.7, E76.6 and E86.15.

The order in which deletions and additions of text in the notes on the left-hand
pages are printed attempts to follow as much as possible the likely order in which
the revisions took place. Note that the various types of brackets can be nested
where applicable (see the key to the sample paragraph below).

Diacritical markings and symbols used
text
<text>

(Overstruck text) Deletion of text.
(Text enclosed by angular brackets) Non run-on (supralinear, mar-
ginal, etc.) addition of text.
(Overstruck  text  enclosed  by  angular  brackets)  Addition  of  text
followed by deletion of same text.
(Text followed by a right double guillemet followed by text, en-
closed in braces) Resolution of consecutive revision levels in the
preceding text, below paragraph level, in cases where the regular
use  of  diacritical  marks  and  symbols  might  remains  ambiguous.
(N.B.: the surface reading is not included in the resolved rendition.)
(Slashed O) Deletion in the resolved rendition of consecutive revi-
sion levels.
(Bold text) Text inadvertently left uncancelled, or open variant.
(Underlined text) Underlining of text by Beckett.
(Row  of  full  stops  enclosed  by  italic  square  brackets)  Space  left
blank by Beckett, each full stop indicating the extent of approxi-
mately one character.
(Roman text enclosed within italic square brackets, ending with an
italic question mark) Uncertain reading.

<text>

{text » text}

Ø

text
text
[....]

[text?]

77

VOLUME 1

[Xxxx]

f.
&

text

/

//
[Comment]
>

Sample Fragment:

(A sequence of x’s enclosed by italic square brackets) Illegible text,
the number of x’s indicating the estimated extent in characters; the
capital  X  indicates  that  the  ﬁrst  illegible  character  is  probably  a
capital.
Folio (followed by sheet number).
(Ampersand) Beckett frequently employs an idiosyncratically shaped
character, appearing like an x with the left-hand or top two ex-
tremities  joined,  which  could  be  read  as  +  or  &,  to  signify  the
word “and”; this has been transliterated as &.
(Italic text, not enclosed in editorial square brackets) Text of para-
graph presented out of sequence in the surface text (either before
or after its actual position in the manuscript or typescript).
(Slash) Line break (in poems or other places where it may be con-
sidered relevant).
(Double slash) New paragraph.
(Italic text enclosed by italic square brackets) Editorial comment.
(Triangle) The text of this paragraph is to be continued on the next
page, or is continued from the previous page.

5 <The <as one> plodding two <twain>.
6 As from now> Three for head with eyes and hands. <[xxxx]> <as said.>
(C36)

This can be resolved as follows. The base text has Three for head with eyes and hands.
Text is then added in three distinct segments to the base text: (1) <The <as one>
plodding two <twain>. As from now; (2) an illegible word of about four characters in
length, which has, however, been deleted again: <[xxxx]>; and (3) the phrase <as
said.>. Within segment (1) a further phrase has been added: <as one>; while two
has been replaced by <twain>.

78

WORSTWARD HO

79

A[Title: all capitals, centered and underlined,in the head margin. Immediately below,aligned right, also underlined, the place anddate of composition are inscribed as Paris, August .]D[No title. TS numbered “II” in top right-hand corner.]D [In margin: ]Be it said on.a<Missaid on.> Yet a<A>gain on.<Said nohow on.>B[MS B continues on the same page where Ais abandoned (f. r). A and B are separatedby a solid bar, black over red ink, of .mmthickness across the width of the page. Thereis no new title. Place and date of compositionare given as Paris,  September .]BaProem.aAll shadow.bAll.C[TS numbered “I” in top right-hand corner.No title. Editorial remark by Beckett at topright of ﬁrst page: To think with dregs ofmind..! Dregs for remains passim.]Ci[Paragraph added in handwriting to the top ofthe ﬁrst page.][xxx] On.<Say on.Be it said on.>aAgain on.Somehow on.Till nohow on.Cii[Paragraph added in handwriting, betweenCi and C (the beginning of the TSproper).]a<Yet> Again on.E[Title: The title is added in full capitals in ahand other than Beckett’s.]VOLUME WORSTWARD HOA[-]B[-]C[ii] On.   Say on.   Be it said on.  a Yet again on.   Somehow on.   Till nohow on.   [-]D On.   Say on.   Be said on.  a Again on.   Somehow on.   Till nohow on.   Saidnohow on.E On.   Say on.   Be said on.   Somehow on.   Till nohow on.   Said nohow on.C[The paragraph is added in handwriting inthe left margin at the level of the ﬁrst line oftyped text (C), the whole encircled with anarrow pointing to the word “Paragraph”written directly above.]Say short for be said.D[In margin: ]Say a body. Say for be <it> said.<Missaid.>From now on. <say for bemissaid.>VOLUME WORSTWARD HOC Say a body.   Say for be said.   [-]   Once & for all.D Say for be said.   Missaid.   From now say for be missaid.E Say for be said.   Missaid.   From now say for be missaid.B[-]A[-]A<That at least.>bA body [x] where none.a<Rot in.Rot on in.>cNothing all [xxx]C<Say> <Be said> A body. <Say abody>. {A body. » Say a body. » Besaid a body. » Say a body.},,[Sentences crossed out, but with supra-linear comment “Stet”.]aNothing more.bSweet blest all.D[In margin: ]<Still.>VOLUME WORSTWARD HOA A body.   Where none.   No mind.   Where none.   That at least .  A place. Where none.   For the body.   To be in.   Move in.   Out of.   Back into.a Nothing more.  b A body where none.  c No mind.  d Where none.  e A place.f Where none.  g For the body.  h To be in.  i Move in.  j Out of.  k Back into. No.   [-]   [-]   In only.   Stay in.  a Rot in.   Rot on in.   [-]  a Nothingmore.  b Above all.  c Nothing all.  d Sweet blest all.B A body.   Where none.   No mind.   Where none.   That at least.   A place. Where none.   For the body.   To be in.   Move in.   Out of.   Back into. No.   No out.   [-]   In only.   Stay in.   On in.   [-]  a Nothing else.b Nothing sweet blest all.C Say a body.   Where none.   No mind.   Where none.   That at least.   A place. Where none.   For the body.   To be in.   Move in.   Out  of.   Back into.   No. No out.   [-]   In only.   Stay in.   On in.   [-]D Say a body.   Where none.   No mind.   Where none.   That at least.   A place. Where none.   For the body.   To be in.  Move in.   Out of.   Back into.   No. No out.   [-]   Only in.   Stay in.   On in.   Still.E Say a body.   Where none.   No mind.   Where none.   That at least.   A place. Where none.   For the body.   To be in.   Move in.   Out of.   Back into.   No. No out.   No back.   Only in.   Stay in.   On in.   Still.AT[xx]<ry> again.BAll <that> before.CAll ago. Long ago <of old>.D[In margin: ]VOLUME WORSTWARD HOA All before.   Nothing else ever .  Ever tried.   Ever failed.   No matter.   Try again. Fail again.   Fail better.B All before.   Nothing else ever.   Ever tried.   Ever failed.   No matter.  a Again. Try again.   Fail again.   Fail better.C All of old.   Nothing else ever.   Ever tried.   Ever failed.   No matter.  a Sameagain.   Try again.   Fail again.   Fail better.D All of old.   Nothing else ever.   Ever tried.   Ever failed.   No matter.  a Sameagain.   Try again.   Fail again.   Fail better.E All of old.   Nothing else ever.   Ever tried.   Ever failed.   No matter.   Try again. Fail again.   Fail better.B[Notes on facing page (f. v): Whose this - ?One’s who - ? Whose these words?One’s beyond words.]CNo <Now> either.Now the <the> other. [The scrib-bled mark transcribed here and in  and below as an inserted the in fact looksmore like “ti” or “t’. However, noword other than the appears possible.]Sick of either try the <the> other.Sick of it back sick of the <of the>either.D[In margin: ]Sick of <the> either try the other.Throw up <Puke> and go.Throw up <Puke> and back.<Where none.>AbWhere [xxxx] none. [Xxxx xx][New paragraph; place and date ofcomposition entered as Ussy,  August.]Now [xxx xxx] <the> one.St[u?]<i>ck with the one try theother.a<Stick> with it back [xx].b[xxx] <stick with> one.Sick with either [xx] <back> sickwith the other.VOLUME WORSTWARD HOA First the body.   No.   The place.  a First the place.  b Where none.   No. Together.   Now the one.   Now the other.   Stick with the one try the other.a Stick with it back.  b Stick with one.   Sick with either back sick with the other.a First stick with both.   [-]   [-]   Sick with both.   Puke & vanish.   Where noplace. No body.   Till sick with there.   [-]   Then again. A body.   Where none. A place.   Where none.   [-]   Fail again.   Fail better again.  a [Still?] betteragain.   [-] >B First the body.   No.   The place.   No.   Together.   Now the one.   Now theother.   Sick of the one. Try the other.   Sick of it. Back sick of the one.   So on. [-]  a Back & forth.   Till sick of both.   Throw up & go.   Where neither.   Tillsick of there.   [-]  a Then again.   A body again.   Where none.   A place again. Where none.   [-]   Fail again.   Better again.  [-] >C First the body.   No.   The place.   No.   Together.   Now either.   Now the other. Sick of either try the other.   Sick of it back sick of the either.   So on.   [-]   Tillsick of both.   Throw up and go.   Where neither.   Till sick of there.   Throw upand back.   A body again.   Where none.   A place again.   Where none.   [-] Fail again.   Better again.   Or better worse. >D First the body.   No.   First the place.   No.   First both.    Now either.   Now theother.   Sick of the either try the other.   Sick of it back sick of the either.   So on. Somehow on.   Till sick of both.  Puke and go.   Where neither.   Till sick ofthere.   Puke and back.   A body again.   Where none.   A place again.    Wherenone.   [-]   Fail again.   Better again.   Or better worse. >E First the body.   No.   First the place.   No.   First both.   Now either.   Now theother.   Sick of the either try the other.   Sick of it back sick of the either.   So on. Somehow on.   Till sick of both.   Throw up and go.   Where neither.   Tillsick of there.   Throw up and back.   The body again.   Where none.   The placeagain.   Where none.   Try again.   Fail again.   Better again.   Or better worse.>AWhere no [xxxxx] . None left.[more?].DThrow up <Puke> for good.VOLUME WORSTWARD HOA> [-]   [-]  a Till stick for good.   Sick for good.  a Fail for good.  , Puke the lastpuke & vanish for good.   Where no [xxxxx] [more?].   [-]B>  Worse again.   Still worse again.   Till sick for good.   Throw up for good.  Go for good.   Where neither for good.   Good & all.C>  Fail worse again.   Still worse again.   Till sick for good.   Throw up for good. Go for good.   Where neither for good.   Good and all.D>  Fail worse again. Still worse again.   Till sick for good.   Puke for good.   Go for good.   Whereneither for good.   Good and all.E>  Fail worse again.   Still worse again.   Till sick for good.   Throw up for good. Go for good.   Where neither for good.   Good and all.AThat’s it. [xxxxx] The bones.The ground or ﬂoor [xx] whateverit is hard as iron.Pain without mind? No mind &pain?Answer <Say> yes for the bones topain till it has to stand.<Say> Just enough mind for pain.a[Either will do.?] Either.[xxx] Provided pain.BHad to <Must> up in the end &stand.Earth. Stones.CMust <Had to> up in the end andstand.Yes. No choice in the end but upand stand. Say the bones.<No bones but> Say for examplethe bones.The earth. <ground.>Say for example <No ground butsay> the earth <ground>.Say yes that the bones may pain tillit must <had to> stand.Or a minimum <remains>.Say a minimum <remains> ofmind where none to permit ofpain.Here of the bones till they must<had to> <no choice but> {theymust » they had to » no choice but}up somehow and stand.<Somehow up.>D[In margin:  and S (for Shade )]Say the bones.No bones but say the bones.The <A> ground <Ground> {Theground » A ground » <Ground>.}No ground but say the groud. aground.Or <better worse> remains.<Say> remains of mind wherenone to permit of pain.No mind or remains of. <Either.>Providing pain. <Remains of mindwhere none for sake of pain.>VOLUME WORSTWARD HOA It stands.   What?   Yes.   Stands.   Had to get up in the end & stand.  a Yes.b Nothing for it in the mud but get up & stand.   The bones.   [-]   The ground orﬂoor whatever it is hard as iron.   [-]   [-]   No mind & pain?   Say yes for thebones to pain till it has to stand.   But up somehow & stand.   Or just enough. Say just enough mind for pain.  ,, In this case for the bones to pain all positionssitting & lying till it has to get up somehow & stand.  a Either.   Provided pain. >B It stands.   What?   Yes.   [-]   Must up in the end & stand.  a Why?   Imaginebones.   [-]   Stones.   [-]   Pain.   No mind and pain?   Say yes that the bonesmay pain. Till it must up in the end & stand.   Up somehow & stand.   Or aminimum.   A minimum of mind where none to permit of pain.   That the bones maypain till up somehow & stand.   [-]   Somehow stand.  a Either.   Providing pain. >C It stands.   What?   Yes.   [-]   Had to up in the end and stand.   Say the bones. No bones but say the bones.   The ground.   No ground but say the ground.a Ironhard.   [-]   No mind and pain?   Say yes that the bones may pain till it had tostand.   Up somehow and stand.   Or remains.   Say remains of mind where noneto permit of pain.   Here of bones till no choice but up and stand.   Somehow up. Somehow stand.  a Either.   Providing pain. >D It stands.   What?   Yes.   [-]   Had to up in the end and stand.   Say bones.   Nobones but say bones.   Ground.   No ground but say ground.   So as to say pain. No mind and pain?   Say yes that the bones may pain till it has to stand.   Upsomehow and stand.   Or better worse remains.   Say remains of mind where noneto permit of pain.   Pain of bones till no choice but up and stand.   Somehow up. Somehow stand.   Remains of mind where none for sake of pain. >E It stands.   What?   Yes.   Say it stands.   Had to up in the end and stand.   Saybones.   No bones but say bones.   Say ground.   No ground but say ground.   So asto say pain.   No mind and pain?   Say yes that the bones may pain till no choice butstand.   Somehow up and stand.   Or better worse remains.   Say remains of mindwhere none to permit of pain.   Pain of bones till no choice but up and stand. Somehow up.   Somehow stand.   Remains of mind where none for the sake ofpain. >A[Between a and b: Fragment cancelled bymeans of diagonal lines (in addition to eachline being crossed out horizontally): [xxxxxxx xx xx] water mattress in the lightof the nightlight. Just see the ceiling.[Seeing it?] all. Seen by all. Scraps. Dimscraps here & there. [Worse?] then.[On?] the ceiling. [xxxxx] Saying it all.Muttering it all to himself as it comes.Image goes. Mutter stops. Comes again.Mutter again.]hThe scream so | [f. r] long on itsway.i<Of pain.>m<Not now. [xxxx] yet.>COther example<s> to come.DOther examples if need be. <smust.>VOLUME WORSTWARD HOA>  Here of bones.   Other examples later.   Of pain.   Relief from pain.   [-]a Temporary relief.  b [Here?] how no choice in the end but get up and stand.  c Getup somehow & somehow stand.  d No decision.  e No mind for that.  f Just nochoice.  g That or scream.  h The scream so long on its way.  i Of pain.  j No.k No or.  l No scream.  m Not now [xxxx] yet.  n No choice but up.  o Up oﬀ theﬂoor or ground whatever it is hard as iron.B>  Here of bones.   Other examples to come.   Of pain.   Relief from pain. Change of pain.C>  Here of bones.   Other examples to come.   Of pain.   Relief from.   Changeof.D>  Here of bones.   Other examples if needs must   Of pain.   Relief from.  Change of.E>  Here of bones.   Other examples if needs must.   Of pain.   Relief from. Change of.Ai[Paragraph cancelled by means of doublediagonal lines.]aMutter.bScraps of Mutter.cAnother.d[xxxxx] that everlasting [xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx]<Again.>eNow on its back <supine> on its<a> water-mattress in the light ofits <a> night-light.fCeiling or whatever it is just visible.gSeeing it all.hDimly all.iDim scraps here & there <on & oﬀ.>jNow and then. <On & oﬀ.>kOn the ceiling [x] <or whatever.>lMuttering it all as it comes.mOn & oﬀ the ceiling or whatever.nOr in the air.oBetter in the air.pNo ceiling.qNone visible.rDim scraps in the air.sOn & oﬀ in the empty air.tIn the light of the night-light.uAnother hearing.vYet another other.wAgain.xStraining to hear.ySomewhere there another strainingto hear.zIn the light of the night-light.<All that before.Nothing else ever.>But with luck <given care> never<before> so ill.bSo failed.With <Given> care never <be-fore> so failed.Aiit[Yet?] another other.u[xx] Yet again.aGiven care never before so ill.BAll that before.CAnother All ago <of old>. Longago <Long ago>.D[In margin: ]VOLUME WORSTWARD HOA[ii] Another.  a Yet again.  b Here for the moment supine on a water-mattress in the lightof a night-light.  c Ceiling or whatever just visible.  d Seeing it all.  e Straining to see itall.  f Dimly all.  g Dim scraps.  h On the ceiling.  i Muttering it all as it comes.  j On& oﬀ the ceiling or whatever.  k Or in the air.  l Or in the air.  m Try in the air.  n Noceiling.  o None visible.  p Dim scraps in the air.  q For the moment in the air.  r Onand oﬀ in the empty air.  s Another hearing.  t Another other.  u Yet again.  v Strainingto hear.  w Somewhere there another straining to hear.  x In the light of the night-light. All that before.   Nothing else ever.   But never so ill.  a Given care never so ill.  b Sofailed.   [-]   Given care never before so failed.B All before.   Nothing else ever.   But never so failed.   Worse failed.   With carenever worse failed.C All of old.   Nothing else ever.   But never so failed.   Worse failed.   With carenever worse failed.D All of old.   Nothing else ever.   But never so failed.   Worse failed.   With carenever worse failed.E All of old.   Nothing else ever.   But never so failed.   Worse failed.   With carenever worse failed.B[The text of what in the ﬁnal version isparagraph  is at B; it is here printed out ofsequence.]AaDetail f<F>atal.bSuch as the water-mattress.No nothing no. Know nothing nonot now.Merely the <merest> minimum.D[In margin:  and D (for Dim light)]At most a <mere> minimum.CToo much. Nightlight too much.[“?” in margin, probably referring to theword “nightlight”, which is under-lined.]Faint <Dim> <Faint> <Dim>light source unknown.VOLUME WORSTWARD HOA No detail above all.  a Fatal.  b Such as water-mattress.  c Any mattress too much.d Simply supine.   Dim light source unknown.   Know the minimum.   Knownothing no not now.   Not here. Not yet.   The minimum.   The merest minimum.B [-]   [-]   No nothing no.   Not yet.   At most the minimum.   The meremost minimum.Ba All shadow.C Dim light source unknown.   Know the minimum.   Know nothing no.   Not yet. At most the minimum.   Meremost minimum.D Dim light source unknown.   Know a minimum.   Know nothing no.   Not yet. At most mere minimum.   Meremost minimum.E Dim light source unknown.   Know minimum.   Know nothing no.   Too much tohope.   At most mere minimum.   Meremost minimum.A[Note on opposite page (f. v): A [xxxx] forthe [time?] it [xxxxx] takes. In theplural. From the upper range.]b<No choice.>aSomehow up oﬀ the the [sic] ﬂooror ground whatever it is hard asiron.,How ﬁnally ﬁrst if lying to begin[xx] it somehow sits. Somehowﬁnally ﬁrst succeeds in sitting.a[xxxx xxxx] or four at leastfTill the impossible achieved. | [f. ]Fail better [xxx xx] now.Aa [Cancelled by means of diagonal lines,together with Ab and Ai.]So <[xxx]> in the end mismutteredhalf heard half seen the bodysomehow standing.Ab [New paragraph.]A time <Time was> when[xxxxxxxxx] <what sight.>aWhat mind.bWhat word.c<No more.>dWhen what [left?].eOf sight.f<Of> Mind.g<Of> Word.hNo more.iWhen whose what left.jOf sight.kOf mind.lOf word.mNo more.nSuch as seen and no more.o[xx] To mind.pAs of old.qNo more.D[In margin:  and S]CLong since it stood and n<N>ochoice but stand.The shriek <shriek at last> so longon its way.aNot yet <now>.aSomehow the bones oﬀ theironhard. up.,How ﬁnally ﬁrst if lying to beginit somehow sits. <How ﬁrst it lies<lay>. Then somehow sits sat.>Stage by stage. <Bit by bit.>Stage by stage. <Bit by bit.>BA time when attempt <try> todescribe.,How ﬁnally ﬁrst from lying tobegin it somehow [xxxx] say sits.Not [x] now.VOLUME WORSTWARD HOA So long since it stood & no choice but to stand.   Get up somehow & stand. Somehow stand.   That or scream.   The scream so long on its way.  a Of pain.   No.a No or.  b No choice.   No scream.  a Not now.  b Not here.  c Not yet.   [-] Simply up.  a Somehow up oﬀ the the ﬂoor or ground whatever it is hard as iron. A time when the various stages.   [-]   [-]  , How ﬁnally ﬁrst if lying to begin itsomehow sits. Somehow ﬁnally ﬁrst succeeds in sitting.  a Similarly subsequent stages. [-]   [-]   [-]   Till it ﬁnally stands.  a The postures.  b The problems.  c Thesolutions.  d The frustrations.  e The triumphs.  f Till the impossible achieved.g And a term for the total time taken.  h From the upper range.  i In the plural. Not now.   Fail better now.D No choice then but stand.   Up somehow and stand.   Somehow stand.   That orgroan.   The groan so long on its way.   No.   No groan.  a Not now.   Simplypain.   Simply up.  a Somehow up.   A time when how.   [-]   [-]   How ﬁrst itlay.   Then somehow sat.   Bit by bit.   Then on from there.   Bit by bit.   Till atlast up.   Not now.   Fail better worse now.B Long since it stood & no choice but stand.   Up somehow & stand.   Somehowstand.   [-]   [-]   [-]   [-]   [-]   [-]  a Somehow the bones oﬀ the stones.   A timewhen try to describe.   [-]   [-]  a Stage by stage.  b At length.  , How ﬁnallyﬁrst from lying to begin it somehow say sits.  a Or kneels.   [-]   So on from there. [-]   [-]  a Till the impossible achieved.   Not now.   Fail better worse now.C No choice but stand.   Up somehow and stand.   Somehow stand.   That or shriek. The shriek at last so long on its way.   No.   No shriek.  a Not now.   Simply pain. Simply up.  a Somehow up.   A time when how.   [-]   [-]   How ﬁrst it lay. Then somehow sat.   Bit by bit.   Then on from there.   Bit by bit.   Till ﬁnallyup.   Not now.   Fail better worse now.E No choice but stand.   Somehow up and stand.   Somehow stand.   That or groan. The groan so long on its way.   No.   No groan.   Simply pain.   Simply up.   Atime when try how.   Try see.   Try say.   How ﬁrst it lay.   Then somehow knelt. Bit by bit.   Then on from there.   Bit by bit.   Till up at last.   Not now.   Failbetter worse now.Ai[Cancelled, together with Aa and Ab.]Head sunkVertex vertical.Aii [Note on facing page (f. v): Out ofreach. Out of speech.]<Closed eyes.>Seeing <Suﬀering> <Seat of> it all.aDimly all. <dim all>cThe supine one. <other>dThe listening one. <other.>e<The bowed other.>gThe <In> empty air. The void.iSuﬀering the mutter. What audi-ence of the mutter. To<In> thehorizontal <bent> [ears?].CEyes shut <clenched>.Seat of it all.D[In margin:  and S]<Source <Germ> of all.>VOLUME WORSTWARD HOA[ii] Another.   [-]  a Another other.  b [Here?] again.   Head sunk on crippled hands. Vertex vertical.   Closed eyes.   Seat of it all.   [-]  b The standing one.  c Thesupine other.  d The listening other.  e The bowed other.  f The faint light.  g Thevoid.  h The mutter.  i In the bent [ears?].B Another.   [-]  a Again.   Head sunk on crippled hands.   Vertex vertical.   Eyesclosed.   Shadow theatre of it all.   [-]C Another.   [-]   Head sunk on crippled hands.   Vertex vertical.   Eyes clenched. Seat of all.   [-]D Another.   [-]   Head sunk on crippled hands.   Vertex vertical.   Eyes clenched. Seat of all.   Germ of all.E Another.   Say another.   Head sunk on crippled hands.   Vertex vertical.   Eyesclenched.   Seat of all.   Germ of all.A<No future in this.Alas yes.>BAlas yes. | [f. ]D[In margin: ]VOLUME WORSTWARD HOA No future in this.   Alas yes.B No future in this.   Alas yes.C No future in this.   Alas yes.D No future in this.   Alas yes.E No future in this.   Alas yes.ASee in the void how <at last> itstands.aDimly stands in the void.For <Before> the upturned<upcast> eyes.For The downcast eyes.The open <staring> eyes.The c<C>losed staring eyes.B[The paragraph following B in the MS isB, which appears thus in a sequence diﬀerentfrom that of the ﬁnal text; it is printed at Babove.]CSee in the dim light <void> how atlast it stands.In the faint <dim> <faint> lightsource unknown.The staring eyes.The shut <clenched> eyes.Shut <Clenched> staring eyes.D[In margin:  and S/]VOLUME WORSTWARD HOA It stands.    See in the void how at last it stands.  a Dimly in the void.   In the faintlight source unknown.   Before the upcast eyes.   The downcast eyes.   The staringeyes.   The closed eyes.   Closed staring eyes.B It stands.   See in the dim air how at last it stands.   Before the downcast eyes.,, The closed staring eyes.   In the faint light source unknown.C It stands.   See in the dim void how at last it stands.   In the faint light sourceunknown.   Before the downcast eyes.   Staring eyes.   Clenched eyes.   Clenchedstaring eyes.D It stands.   See in the dim void how at last it stands.   In the dim light sourceunknown.   Before the downcast eyes.   Staring eyes.   Clenched eyes.   Clenchedstaring eyes.E It stands.   See in the dim void how at last it stands.   In the dim light sourceunknown.   Before the downcast eyes.   Clenched eyes.   Staring eyes.   Clenchedstaring eyes.AA <That> shadow.CThat shadow<e>.That the <a> body?aThat the <a> body.Say that the <a> body.aThat shadow<e> the <a> body.BYes.D[In margin:  and S]EIn the dim void. | [f. ]VOLUME WORSTWARD HOA That shadow.   Lately lying.  a Long lying.   Now standing.  a Somehow standing.b After long.  c In the dim air.   That the body?   Yes.  a That the body.   Say that thebody.  a That shadow the body.   Somehow standing.   In the dim air.B That shadow.   Lately lying.   Now standing.  a Somehow standing.  b In the dimair.   That the body?   [-]  a That the body.   Say that the body.  a That shadow thebody.   Somehow standing.   In the dim air.C That shade.   Lately lying.  a Long lying.   Now standing.  a Somehow standing.b At long last.  c In the dim void.   That a body?   Yes.  a That a body.   Say that abody.  a That shade a body.   Somehow standing.   In the dim void.D That shade.   Once lying.   Now standing  a Somehow standing.  b In the dim void. That a body?   Yes.   That a body.  a That shade a body.   Somehow standing.   Inthe dim void.E That shade.   Once lying.   Now standing.   That a body?   Yes.   Say that a body. Somehow standing.   In the dim void.AHow bound if bound <if notboundless bounded>.Not <Un>know better now.Way in one way. no way out.So <Hence> another place.[Whence?] Whither once whenceno return.aNo need. (c?) <Too much.>Whence once in no way <never>out.Ca<Try> Know.Whence the faint <dim> <faint><dim> light.Hence another place.Whence once in never out.D[In margin:  and V]<Try say.>Now [sic] if not boundlessbounded.Whence [once in never trs to:]never once in.BOnce somehow it. [sic]VOLUME WORSTWARD HOA The place.   Where none.   A time when try to see.  a To know.   [-]   How small. How vast.   How if not boundless bounded.   Whence the faint light.   Not now. Know better now.   Unknow better now.   Know only no way out.    [-]   Wayin no way out.   Hence another place.   Again another place where none. Whither once whence no return.   No.  a Too much.   No place but the one. None but the one where none.   Whence once in never out.   Once somehow in.  >D A place.   Where none.   A time when try see.  a Try know.   Try say.   Howsmall.   How vast.   How if not boundless bounded.   Whence the dim.   Not now. Know better now.   Unknow better now.   Know only no out of.   [-]   Intoonly.   Hence another.   Another place where none.   Whither once whence noreturn.   No.   No place but the one.   None but the one where none.   Whencenever once in.   Once somehow in. >E A place.   Where none.   A time when try see.   Try say.   How small.   How vast. How if not boundless bounded.   Whence the dim.   Not now.   Know better now. Unknow better now.   Know only no out of.   No knowing how know only noout of.   Into only.   Hence another.   Another place where none.   Whither oncewhence no return.   No.   No place but the one.   None but the one where none. Whence never once in.   Somehow in. >C A place.   Where none.   A time when try see.  a Try know.   [-]   How small. How vast.   How if not boundless bounded.   Whence the dim.   Not now. Know better now.   Unknow better now.   Know only no out of.   [-]   Intoonly.   Hence another.   Another place where none.   Whither once whence noreturn.   No.  a Too much.   No place but the one.   None but the one wherenone.   Whence once in never.   Once somehow in. >B A place.   Where none.   A time where try to see.  a To know.   [-]   How small. How vast.   How if not boundless bounded.   Whence the faint light.   Not now. Know better now.   Unknow better now.   Know only not out of.   [-]   Intoonly.   Hence another place.  a Again.   Another place where none.   Whitheronce whence no return.   No.  a Too much.   No place but the one.   None butthe one where none.   Whence once in never out.   Once somehow it. >CThitherless thenceless there. | [f. ]DThenceless thitherless there. | [f. ]VOLUME WORSTWARD HOA>  Beyondless.   Thereless here.   [-]   [-]B>  Beyondless.   Thenceless there.   [-]   [-]C>  Beyondless.   Thenceless there.   Thitherless there.   Thitherless thencelessthere.D>  Beyondless.   Thenceless there.   Thitherless there.   Thenceless thitherlessthere.E>  Beyondless.   Thenceless there.   Thitherless there.   Thenceless thitherlessthere.CWhere then but there see now - .AiWhere then now next in the dimair but here see -D[In margin: ]Where then but there see<n> now -VOLUME WORSTWARD HOA[ii] Where then but here in the dim air see now -B Where then but there in the dim air -C Where then but there see now -D Where then but there see -E Where then but there see -Di[Paragraph handwritten in head margin, withparagraph sign beside it and arrow pointing toinsertion point to follow paragraph ;cancelled by means of diagonal lines.]Seen for be it seen.Misseen.a[Now?]bFrom now not now seen and nowmisseen.From now seen alone.Seen for misseen.For be it misseen. [from this sentenceto the last (c) enclosed in squarebrackets; signiﬁcance unclear]aMissaid<y> misseen.bBe it missaid misseen.cSeen from now for be itmissaid<y> misseen.Dii [Paragraph handwritten in headmargin; no insertion mark but clearly a faircopy of above.]VOLUME WORSTWARD HOA[-]B[-]C[-]D[ii] See for be seen.   Misseen.   From now see for be misseen.E See for be seen.   Misseen.   From now see for be misseen.VOLUME WORSTWARD HOA [-]B [-]C [-]D [-]E Where then but there see now -CBut ﬁrst back turned the shadowbody standing <e astand>.First say back turned in the dimvoid the shadow body standing <eastand>.D[In margin:  and S]But ﬁrst back turned the shadeastand.[First see back turned in the dimvoid the shade astand. trs to:] in thedim void First see back turned theshade astand.ABut ﬁrst back turned the shadowbody standing before the staringeyes.VOLUME WORSTWARD HOA But ﬁrst back turned the shadow body standing.   First add back turned in the dim airthe shadow body standing.   Still.B But ﬁrst back turned the shadow standing.   First add back turned in the dim air theshadow standing.   At rest.C But ﬁrst back turned the shade astand.   First say back turned in the dim void theshade astand.   Still.D First back turned the shade astand.   In the dim void ﬁrst see back turned the shadeastand.   Still.E First back turned the shade astand.   In the dim void see ﬁrst back turned the shadeastand.   Still.Ai[Paragraph cancelled by means of diagonallines.]Where then but here elsewhereless<thereless here> [now?] in the dimair [xxx] <see> now [another?]shadow[xx].[xx] [slowly?] to the staring eyes<ﬁrst> a man & child. | [f. r]Aii[xx] little by little in the end a man& child.aAn old man & tiny <small> child.bStill the body [standing?] <one>[xxxx] the shadow body standing[xxx] still [now?]c<Gone shadow body one>dSee now [xxxx] another shadow.[xx] Little by little in the end an oldman & <with> tiny small child.BWhere then but there [x] another.C<Say now another.aAnother shadow<e>>D[In margin:  and S]Where then but there see<n> nowanother.Bit by bit in the dim void an oldman and child. [Marginal Stet voids atransposition to in the dim void Bitby bit]VOLUME WORSTWARD HOA[ii] Where then but thereless here in the dim air see now another shadow.   Little bylittle in the end a man & child.  a An old man & small child.  c Gone shadow bodyone.  d See now another.   Little by little in the end an old man with small child.   [-]B Where then but there another.  a Again.   Slowly an old man & child.   Slowly inthe dim air an old man & child.   [-]C Say now another.  a Another shade   Where then but there see now another.   Littleby little an old man and child.   Little by little in the dim void an old man and child. [-]D Where then but there see now another.   Bit by bit an old man and child.   Bit bybit in the dim void an old man and child.   [-]E Where then but there see now another.   Bit by bit an old man and child.   In thedim void bit by bit an old man and child.   Any other would do as ill.A[Notes on facing page (f. v), cancelledtogether by means of diagonal lines: Slowlywith never a pause plod on & neverrecede. Backs turned. Both bowed. <[allxxx]> <Joined by held holding hands.>// All dead still]Hand in hand with equal step<plod> they go.a[xxxxx] on.Backs turned both bowed withslow equal step <plod> they go.The child<’s> hand raised to reachthe holding hand.Held holding hands. <Be held &hold.>B[xxx xxxxx xxx xx] In the freehands nothing.One shadow <body>.Another shadow <body>.CIn the one free hand - . No <no>.One shadow body <e>.One <An>other shadow body<e>.D[In margin:  and S]In the one free hands - no.VOLUME WORSTWARD HOA Hand in hand with equal plod they go.   In the one free hand a -   No.  a Toomuch.   In the free hands nothing.   Backs turned both bowed with slow equal plodthey go.   The child’s hand raised to reach the holding hand.   To hold the holdinghand.   Be held & hold.   Plod on but not recede.   Slowly with never a pause plodon & never recede.   Backs turned.   Both bowed.   Joined by held holding hands. Plod on as one.   One shadow body.   Another shadow body.B Hand in hand with equal plod they go.   In the one free hand a -.   No.  a Toomuch.   In the free hands nothing.   Backs turned both bowed with slow equal plodthey go.   The child’s hand raised to reach the holding hand.   To hold the holdinghand.   Be held & hold.   Plod on & never recede.   Slowly with never a pause plodon and never recede.   Backs turned.   Both bowed.   Joined by held holdinghands.   Plod on as one.   One shadow body.   Another shadow body.C Hand in hand with equal plod they go.   In the one free hand - no.  a Too much. Free empty hands.   Backs turned both bowed with equal plod they go.   The childhand raised to reach the holding hand.   Hold the old holding hand.   Be held andhold.   Plod on and never recede.   Slowly with never a pause plod on and neverrecede.   Backs turned.   Both bowed.   Joined by held holding hands.   Plod onas one.   One shade.   Another shade.D Hand in hand with equal plod they go.   In the free hands - no.   Free empty hands. Backs turned both bowed with equal plod they go.   The child hand raised to reachthe holding hand.   Hold the old holding hand.   Hold and be held.   Plod on andnever recede.   Slowly with never a pause plod on and never recede.   Backs turned. Both bowed.   Joined by held holding hands.   Plod on as one.   One shade. Another shade.E Hand in hand with equal plod they go.   In the free hands - no.   Free empty hands. Backs turned both bowed with equal plod they go.   The child hand raised to reachthe holding hand.   Hold the old holding hand.   Hold and be held.   Plod on andnever recede.   Slowly with never a pause plod on and never recede.   Backs turned. Both bowed.   Joined by held holding hands.   Plod on as one.   One shade. Another shade.AAn old man & <with> child.cSo far.dThe whole dead stiAa [This and the following paragraphcancelled together by means of diagonal lines.Notes on facing page (f. v), cancelled bymeans of diagonal lines: It. They. <Bone.Earth.> Body. Mind. Head. Hands.Eyes. <What worse come.> All shadow.<All shadow.> Never again. Never thatword <again>. From [whomeverfrom?]. No. Never no. Now & thenstill. Every now & then. To remind. Allshadow. Remind all shadow. All thesurplus <[over?]> excess. All theminimum.]All four in that [xx] where nobeyond.Ab [This and the previous paragraphcancelled together by means of diagonal lines.]Gone shadow body one but not forgood.aGone to give way to two in the[xxxxxx xxxxxx xxx].beyondlessness.bTwo soon to go.cBut not for good.Ac [Notes on facing page (f. v): Shadowof body gone. <Body once.> Bodygone. Shadow still.]Gone not for good <the> shadowbody one.eNot room for two. <Too manytwo together.fToo much.>i[xxx] Closed staring eyes.jSo they come and go.k<Two> Too much for those eyestwo eyes.Ad [Note on facing page (f. v): Résuméso far.]dFrom whomever [xxx] <from.eAll> from.fAll the surplus <excess>.gThat ghost of [xxx] ghosts.Ae [Paragraph cancelled.][xxxx] [meaning of bones?].CShut <Clenched> staring eyes.At in the dim void shadow bodies<es>.One at a stand <astand> at rest.D[In margin:  and S//]VOLUME WORSTWARD HOA The supine one.  a Too much.  b Gone.  c No mutter.  d No listener.  e Gone.f None but the sunken other.   Head sunk on crippled hands.   Closed staring eyes. At in the dim void shadow bodies.   A standing one.  a At rest.   An old man withchild.   At rest plodding on.  a Hand in hand.  b No more.  e No less.  f So far.  g Thewhole dead still.   [-]   [-]   [-]Ac Gone not for good the shadow body one.  a To make way for the other.   b In its turnnot for good to go.  c To make way for another.  d Or for the ﬁrst again  e Too manytwo together.  f Too much.  g In that narrow ﬁeld of void.  h That of the staring eyes.i Closed staring eyes.  k Two too much for those two eyes.Ad Body too much.  a Never again.  c Never that word again.  d From whomever from.e All from.  f All the excess.  g That ghost of ghosts.  h First & last allusion.B[-]C Head sunk on crippled hands.   Clenched staring eyes.   At in the dim void shades. One astand at rest.   One old man and child.   At rest plodding on.   [-]   [-]   [-]D Head sunk on crippled hands.   Clenched staring eyes.   At in the dim void shades. One astand at rest.   One old man and child.   At rest plodding on.   [-]   [-]   [-]E Head sunk on crippled hands.   Clenched staring eyes.   At in the dim void shades. One astand at rest.   One old man and child.   At rest plodding on.   Any otherswould do as ill.   Almost any.   Almost as ill.B[Place and date of composition entered asUssy,  November .][xxx] <[xxxx]> [appear?]. <Fade inagain <back>.>CNow the two <twain>.Now the two <twain>.<No.>Sudden gone.Now the two <twain>.D[In margin:  and S/]VOLUME WORSTWARD HOA[-]B They fade.   Now the one.   Now the two.   Now both.   Fade back.   Now theone.   Now the two.   Now both.   Fade?   No.  a Too much.  b Sudden. Sudden gone.   Sudden back.   Now the one.   Now the two.   Now both.C They fade.   Now the one.   Now the twain.   Now both.   Fade back.   Now theone.   Now the twain.   Now both.   Fade?   No.  a Too much.  b Sudden. Sudden go.   Sudden back.   Now the one.   Now the twain.   Now both.D They fade.   Now the one.   Now the twain.   Now both.   Fade back.   Now theone.   Now the twain.   Now both.   Fade?   No.  a Sudden.   Sudden go. Sudden back.   Now the one.   Now the twain.   Now both.E They fade.   Now the one.   Now the twain.   Now both.   Fade back.   Now theone.   Now the twain.   Now both.   Fade?   No.   Sudden go.   Sudden back. Now the one.   Now the twain.   Now both.B[New paragraph]Till [xx] no.CaWait.[New paragraph.]D[In margin: ]aBack unchanged.<?>Say <Till say> no.VOLUME WORSTWARD HOA[-]B Unchanged?  a Back unchanged?   Sudden back unchanged?  a Wait.   Yes.   Sayyes.  a Unchanged.   Each time unchanged.   [-]   Till no.   Till say no.   Backchanged.   Somehow changed.   Each time somehow changed.C Unchanged?  a Back unchanged?   Sudden back unchanged?   Yes.   Say yes.   Eachtime unchanged.   [-]   Till no.   Till say no.   Back changed.   Somehow changed. Each time somehow changed.D Unchanged?  a Back unchanged?   Sudden back unchanged?   Yes.   Say yes.   Eachtime unchanged.   [-]   Till no.   Till say no.   Back changed.   Somehow changed. Each time somehow changed.E Unchanged?   Sudden back unchanged?   Yes.   Say yes.   Each time unchanged. Somehow unchanged.   Till no.   Till say no.   Sudden back changed.   Somehowchanged.   Each time somehow changed.CaNow the one.bNow the other.cNow both.dWait.[New paragraph.]aThe dim.bThe void.<Back too.> [Moved by means oftransposition symbol from originalposition between  and .]aWait.[New paragraph.]B[The entire paragraph is a late addition,written on f. v.]a<Sudden gone.bSudden back.> Wait.cNow <the> one.[New paragraph.]aSudden gone.bSudden back.cUnchanged?<Now both.>[New paragraph.][-] | [f. r]BaHow unchanged?aThe standing one.bThe old man & child.BbThe void.aHow unchanged the void?b[xxxx]D[In margin:  and D/V]E<Somehow unchanged.>VOLUME WORSTWARD HOA[-]B The light    The void.   Gone too?   Back too?  a Sudden gone.  b Sudden back.c Now the one.  d Now the other.  e Now both.  f Wait.   No.   Say no.   Nevergone.   [-]  a The light.  b The void.   Till yes.   Till say yes.   Gone too.   Backtoo.   The light.   The void.   Now the one.   Now the other.   Now both. Sudden gone.   Sudden back.   Unchanged?   [-]  a Wait.   Yes.   Say yes. Unchanged.   [-]   Till no.   Till say no.   Back changed.   Somehow changed. [-]C The dim.   The void.   Gone too?   Back too?   No.   Say no.   Never gone.   [-] Till yes.   Till say yes.   Gone too.   Back too.   The dim.   The void.   Nowthe one.   Now the other.   Now both.   Sudden gone.   Sudden back.  Unchanged?   [-]   Yes.   Say yes.   Unchanged.   [-]   Till no.   Till say no. Back changed.   Somehow changed.   Each time somehow changed.D The dim.   The void.   Gone too?   Back too?   No.    Say no.   Never gone.   [-] Till yes.   Till say yes.   Gone too.   Back too.   The dim.   The void.   Nowthe one.   Now the other.   Now both.   Sudden  gone.   Sudden back.  Unchanged?   [-]   Yes.   Say yes.   Unchanged.   [-]   Till no.   Till say no. Back changed.   Somehow changed.   Each time somehow changed.E The dim.   The void.   Gone too?   Back too?   No.   Say no.   Never gone. Never back.   Till yes.   Till say yes.   Gone too.   Back too.   The dim.   Thevoid.   Now the one.   Now the other.   Now both.   Sudden gone.   Suddenback.   Unchanged?   Sudden back unchanged?   Yes.   Say yes.   Each timeunchanged.   Somehow unchanged.   Till no.   Till say no.   Sudden back changed. Somehow changed.   Each time somehow changed.Bi[On facing page (f. v), cancelled by means ofdiagonal lines:]First the one.Sudden back.Unchanged.a<Middle distance <ground>>b<Full length.>Head bowed <sunk>.Vertex vertical inside the hat.[xx xxxxxx] only back of <black>brim alone.Back of [long?] black <outer> coatcut oﬀ at mid-thigh.aFull length middle ground cut oﬀ atmid-thigh.Kneeling?Say now kneeling.From now on kneeling.Could get no further than to itsknees.Sudden back unchanged <m.d.f.l.>[I.e., middle distance full length.] blackshade head sunk on invisible knees.Still.Bii<Back turned.>Could get <rise> no further thanto its knees.Sudden back unchanged middleground full length [black shadehead sunk trs to:] head sunk blackshade on invisible <unseen> knees.D[In margin:  and S]Back of  Back of black outercoatcut oﬀ midthigh.Sudden <gone sudden> backunchanged back turned head sunkdark shade on unseen knees.CFirst <gone> the one <[x]>. <First<sudden> gone the one.aThe shade astand.><First s>Sudden back.Back of dim black <dark <dimblack>> <dim> rim <blackbrim> alone.Back o[x]<f> dim black <[dim?]black> dark outercoat cut oﬀmidthigh. [The sequence of revisions in and  is not clear, with severalinsertion points for several marginal andsupralinear corrections, each revised intheir turn. The ﬁrst reading is Back ofdim black rim alone. Back of dimblack outercoat cut oﬀ midthigh.]Could rise no more than <but> toits knees.VOLUME WORSTWARD HOA[-]B[ii] First the one.   Sudden back.   Unchanged.  a Middle ground.  b Full length.   [-] [-]   Back turned.   Head sunk.   Vertex vertical inside hat.   Back of black brimalone.   Back of black outercoat cut oﬀ at midthigh.  b Full length middle ground cutoﬀ at midthigh.   Kneeling?   Better kneeling.   [-]   Say now kneeling.   Fromnow kneeling.   Could rise no further than to its knees.   Sudden back unchangedmiddle ground full length head sunk black shade on unseen knees.   Still.C First sudden gone the one.  a The shade astand.   First sudden back.   Unchanged. [-]   [-]   Back turned.   Head sunk.   Vertex vertical in hat.   Back of dim blackbrim alone.   Back of black outercoat cut oﬀ midthigh.   Kneeling?   Betterkneeling.   Better worse kneeling.   Say now kneeling.   From now kneeling. Could rise but to its knees.   Sudden back unchanged back turned head sunk darkshade on unseen knees.   Still.D First sudden gone the one.   First sudden back.   Unchanged.   [-]   [-]   Backturned.   Head sunk.   Vertex vertical in hat.   Back of black brim alone.   Back ofblack outercoat cut oﬀ midthigh.   Kneeling?   Better kneeling.   Better worsekneeling.   Say now kneeling.   From now kneeling.   Could rise but to its knees. Sudden gone sudden back unchanged back turned head sunk dark shade on unseenknees.   Still.E First sudden gone the one.   First sudden back.   Unchanged.   Say now unchanged. So far unchanged.   Back turned.   Head sunk.   Vertex vertical in hat.   Cockedback of black brim alone.   Back of black greatcoat cut oﬀ midthigh.   Kneeling. Better kneeling.   Better worse kneeling.   Say now kneeling.   From nowkneeling.   Could rise but to its knees.   Sudden gone sudden back unchanged backturned head sunk dark shade on unseen knees.   Still.B<Backs turned.>[xxxxx] <Fair> locks.As in step they plod. <on> Withslow equal step <they> plod on.Free white hands. Two free. TwoAs one joined. one. As one.So back unchanged as ﬁrst [de-scried?] plod on as one black<dark> shade plod on.aPlod on & never recede.Unreceding on.CNext <sudden gone> the two<twain>.<Next> Sudden back<.>u <U>nchanged.Dim white. white and hair so fairthat in that dim light white.Dark <Black> outercoats to heels.Now the one two <two left>.Now the other <two right>.As one As on with slow equal stepthey plod.Plod as on [xxx] void.<Dim white.>So sudden back unchanged as saidas one dark shade plod unrecedingon. | [f. ]D[In margin:  and S]Dim white and hair so fair that inthat dim light white. Dim white.<Dim black.>So <sudden gone> sudden backunchanged as one dark shade plodunreceding on.ESo sudden gone sudden backunchanged as one dark shade plodunreceding on. | [f. ]VOLUME WORSTWARD HOA[-]B Next the two.   Sudden back.   Unchanged.   [-]   [-]  a Foreground.  b Fulllength.   Backs turned.   Heads sunk.  a Vertices vertical.   White locks.   Fair locks. Black outercoats to heels.   [-]   Black boots.   Now the one two.   Now theother.   As on with slow equal step they plod.   [-]   [-]  , White hands.   Twofree. Two as one.   So back unchanged as ﬁrst [descried?] as one dark black shade plodon.  a Unreceding on.C Next sudden gone the twain.   Next Sudden back.   Unchanged.   [-]   [-]   Backsturned.   Bare heads sunk.   Dim hair.   Dim white and hair so fair that in that dimlight white.   Dim white.   Black outercoats to heels.   [-]   Bootheels.   Now theone two <two left>.   Now the other <two right>.   As on with equal step theyplod.   No ground.   Plod as on void.   Dim hands.   Dim white.   Two free andtwo as one.   So sudden back unchanged as said as one dark shade plod unrecedingon.D Next sudden gone the twain.   Next sudden back.   Unchanged.   [-]   [-]   Backsturned.   Heads sunk.   Dim hair.   Dim white and so fair that in that dim lightwhite. Dim white.   Black outercoats to heels.   Dim black.   Bootheels.   Nowthe two right.   Now the two left.   As on with equal step they plod.   No ground. Plod as on void.   Dim hands.   Dim white.   Two free and two as one.   Sosudden gone sudden back unchanged as one dark shade plod unreceding on.E Next sudden gone the twain.   Next sudden back.   Unchanged.   Say nowunchanged.   So far unchanged.   Backs turned.   Heads sunk.   Dim hair.   Dimwhite and hair so fair that in that dim light dim white.   Black greatcoats to heels. Dim black.   Bootheels.   Now the two right.   Now the two left.   As on withequal plod they go.   No ground.   Plod as on void.   Dim hands.   Dim white. Two free and two as one.   So sudden gone sudden back unchanged as one darkshade plod unreceding on.Bi[Paragraph cancelled by means of diagonallines. Notes, on facing page (f. v), cancelledby means of diagonal lines: In that void. Acavern in that void. A hole. Strong faintlight in that cavern. That hole. Far &wide. High & low. // No knowing. Nosaying. Were there a cave<rn>. A hole.Strong faint light in that cave<rn>. Thathole. // Every crack & cranny. // Asnever was ]The dim.,Far & wide the same. <High &low.> <Far & wide high & low one& the same.>How obtained?  Unknown.aKnow the minimum.bMere.cKnow [the?] min.d[Unknowable?]?eNo.fUnknown.g[Mere?].h[know?] min.i<Say min.>How say? No way.<Say such> Strong faint light <asnever was>.Pervading all.Were there <Let there be> a cavern<grot>. A hole. In that void.aA grot in that void.A hole.<Then> Strong faint light in thatgrot. That hole.aFar & wide. High & low. <Everycrack & cranny>[No?]. No kno How? No knowing.No saying.BiiFar & wide one and the same.a<Unchanging.><Unchanging.>How <Whence> unknown.Say <only> such faint light asnever was <till [now?]>.Pervading <Said on> all.Let there be <Say> a grot. in thatvoid.Then <there> in that grot [or?]<that> hole such faintest light asnever.How <Where>? No knowing.CMem<ento> know min<imum>.Say min<imum>. <No saying.>Shed o <O>n all.A hole <gulf>.Then there in grot or hole <gulf>such faintest light as never.D[In margin:  and D]<Say now unchanging>Whence unknown. no knowing.Say only such faint <dim> light asnever.Then there in grot or gulf suchfaintest <dimmest> light as never.VOLUME WORSTWARD HOA[-]B[ii] The dim.   Far & wide the same.   High & low.   Unchanging.   [-]   Whenceunknown.  a Mem.  b Know min.   Say min.   Say only such faint light as never till[now?].   Said on all.   Say a grot in that void.   A hole.   Then there in that grotthat hole such faintest light as never.   Every crack & cranny.   Where? No knowing. No saying.C The dim.   Far and wide the same.   High and low.   Unchanging.   [-]   Whenceno knowing.   No saying.   Say only such faint light as never.   On all.   Say a grotin that void.   A gulf.   Then there in grot or gulf such faintest light as never.a Each crack and cranny.   Whence no knowing.   No saying.D The dim.   Far and wide the same.   High and low.   Unchanging.   Say nowunchanging   Whence no knowing.   No saying.   Say only such dim light as never. On all.   Say a grot in that void.   A gulf.   Then there in grot or gulf suchdimmest light as never.   Whence no knowing.   No saying.E The dim.   Far and wide the same.   High and low.   Unchanging.   Say nowunchanging.   Whence no knowing.   No saying.   Say only such dim light as never. On all.   Say a grot in that void.   A gulf.   Then in that grot or gulf such dimmestlight as never.   Whence no knowing.   No saying.CBut for <Were not> the one.The two <twain>.So far but for <were not> the oneand two <twain>.aAh.D[In margin:  and V]<Unchanging.Say now unchanging.Void> W<w>ere not the one.VOLUME WORSTWARD HOA[-]B The void.   [-]   [-]   But for the one.   The two.   So far but for the one & two. So far.  a Ah.C The void.   [-]   [-]   Were not the one.   The twain.   So far were not the oneand twain.   So far.D The void.   Unchanging.   Say now unchanging.   Void were not the one.   Thetwain.   So far were not the one and twain.   So far.E The void.   Unchanging.   Say now unchanging.   Void were not the one.   Thetwain.   So far were not the one and twain.   So far.B[xxx] <Say> then how-CHow say that void. <?>Say only then how - .D[In margin:  and V]How say? <How try to say?>How fail to say?Say only - | [f. ]EHow try say.<?>How try fail.<?>VOLUME WORSTWARD HOA[-]B The void.   How say that void?   [-]   No try no fail.   Say then how -C The void.   How say?   How fail to say?   No try no fail.   Say only then how -D The void.   How say? How try?   How fail?   No try no fail.   Say only -E The void.   How try say?   How try fail?   No try no fail.   Say only -A[Notes on facing page (f. v): So so far notyet gone. Head sunk. Its eyes. As said.Seeing. First one alone. Then the twain.As said. seen. As said. Gone only toreturn. Now the one. [xx] Now theother. And, separate paragraph, encircled:Shadow of dream.]Vague [memory?] Some mention<allusion to> of [sic] bones.<Earth.>aHard surface <ground>.b[xx xxxx]Hard g<G>round <Earth> toomuch. Gone.c[xx] Because of some kind of pain.iGround! Earth! | [f. r]B[Notes on facing page (f. v): Forever on itsknees. So far forever on its]a[Say forever.?]D[In margin:  and S]But ﬁrst the bones.Preying since <ﬁrst> said on theforesaid remains.<Better forever kneeling.>CBut ﬁrst those <the> bones.<On> Back to those bones<them>.Preying since said on what <the>remains of mind.That ironhard. <The earth> <Theground>.That <The> pain.No earth <ground>.No pain. No such<.> pain.Up for some other reason. Un-known. <Why up unknown.>If ever lying <down>.No choice but up if ever lying<down>.aUp for no known reason.Or never lying <down>.Forever on its knees <kneeling>.VOLUME WORSTWARD HOA Bones.  [-]   Vague [memory?]. Some allusion to bones.   Earth.   Pain of bones.a To excuse why up.  b From lying to stand.  c Too much.   Bones too much.   Earthtoo much. Gone.  a Simply pain.  b Some kind of pain.  c Because of some kind ofpain.  d Up for a change of pain.  e Say in the mind.  f In what of mind to permit ofpain.  g In what of shadow mind.  h Bones!  i Earth!   [-]   [-]   [-]   [-]   [-]   [-] [-]   [-] >B But ﬁrst those bones.   Back to those bones.   Preying since said on what remains ofmind.   That iron hard.   That pain.  a Too much.   No bones.   No earth.   Nopain.   Up for some other reason. Unknown.  At all costs unknown.   If ever lying. No choice but up to its knees.   If ever lying.   Or never lying.   Say never lying. Forever on its knees.   Better on its knees. >C But ﬁrst the bones.   On back to them.   Preying since said on the remains of mind. The ground.   The pain.  a Too much.   [-]   No ground.   No pain.   Why upunknown.   At all costs unknown.   If ever down.   No choice but up if everdown.   Or never down.   Forever kneeling.   [-] >D First the bones.   On back to them.   Preying since ﬁrst said on the foresaid remains. The ground.   The pain.   No bones.   No ground.   No pain.   Why up unknown. At all costs unknown.   If ever down.   No choice but up if ever down.   Ornever down.   Forever kneeling.   Better forever kneeling. >E First the bones.   On back to them.   Preying since ﬁrst said on foresaid remains. The ground.   The pain.   No bones.   No ground.   No pain.   Why up unknown. At all costs unknown.   If ever down.   No choice but up if ever down.   Ornever down.   Forever kneeling.   Better forever kneeling. >BSay from now forever on | [f. r] itsknees.CBetter worse forever on its knees<kneeling>.Say from now forever on its knees<kneeling>.So far <from now> forever on itsknees <kneeling>.aAh.VOLUME WORSTWARD HOA>  [-]   [-]   [-]   [-]Aa Shadows of bodies gone.  a Bodies once.  b Bodies gone.  c Shadows still.D>  Better worse forever kneeling.   Say from now forever kneeling.   So far fromnow forever kneeling.   So far.C>  Better worse forever kneeling.   Say from now forever kneeling.   So far fromnow forever kneeling.   So far.B> [-]   Say from now forever on its knees.   So far forever on its knees.   So far.a Ah.E>  Better worse forever kneeling.   Say from now forever kneeling.   So far fromnow forever kneeling.   So far.BBefore the [xxxx] staring eyes.aThat little ﬁeld.That little much of void. <alone.>CThat little <narrow> ﬁeld.D[In margin:  and V]VOLUME WORSTWARD HOB The void.   Before the staring eyes.   Where’er they stare.   Far & wide.   High &low.   That little ﬁeld.   Know no more.   [-]   Say no more.   That alone.   Thatlittle much of void alone.C The void.   Before the staring eyes.   Where’er they stare.   Far and wide.   Highand low.   That narrow ﬁeld.   Know no more.   [-]   Say no more.   That alone. That little much of void alone.D The void.   Before the staring eyes.   Stare where they may.   Far and wide.   Highand low.   That narrow ﬁeld.   Know no more.   [-]   Say no more.   That alone. That little much of void alone.E The void.   Before the staring eyes.   Stare where they may.   Far and wide.   Highand low.   That narrow ﬁeld.   Know no more.   See no more.   Say no more. That alone.   That little much of void alone.B[Note on facing page (f. v), cancelled: Hereback]<Void cannot go.>[xx] Unless dim go. <[If ever.?]><The> One can go.<The> Two can go.Unless dim go. Alone v. Unless dimgo.CHere <on> back to unsay void cango.Unless <Save> dim go.Then all goes.The two <twain> can go.Unless <Save> dim go.D[In margin:  and V]aAll not yet back.VOLUME WORSTWARD HOB Here back to unsay void can go.   Void cannot go.  Unless dim go.   Then all goes. All not already gone.  a All not yet back.   Till dim back.   Then all back.   All notstill gone.   The one can go.   The two can go.   Dim can go.   Alone void cannotgo.   Unless dim go.   [-]C Here on back to unsay void can go.   Void cannot go.   Save dim go.   Then all go. All not already gone.  a All not yet back.   Till dim back.   Then all back.   All notstill gone.   The one can go.   The twain can go.   Dim can go.   Void cannot go.Alone void cannot go.   Save dim go.   [-]D On back to unsay void can go.  Void cannot go.   Save dim go.   Then all go.   Allnot already gone.   Till dim back.   Then all back.   All not still gone.   The one cango.   The twain can go.   Dim can go.   Void cannot go.  a Alone void cannot go. Save dim go.   [-]E On back to unsay void can go.   Void cannot go.   Save dim go.   Then all go.   Allnot already gone.   Till dim back.   Then all back.   All not still gone.   The one cango.   The twain can go.   Dim can go.   Void cannot go.   Save dim go.   Thenall go.CHere <Next> <on> back thebetter worse to fail the head saidseat of all.Where but <if not> there it too?Within <There in> the sunkenhead the sunken head.<[xxx]> Shadow<e> with theothers <shades>.The same little <narrow> void.Before the shut <clenched> staringeyes.Where <it> too but <if not> theretoo?B[Notes on facing page (f. v), cancelled bymeans of diagonal lines: In the same dim asthe other shades. The same little [xx]shadow with the other shadows. In thesame dim. The same little void. Beforeits shut staring eyes.]Here back the better worse to failthat the head said seat of all.a[Seen sunk?] Said sunk on crippledhands.All? Of all?aThen of it too.bNowhere but there it too [of it]not too.cIt in it too.dHead on crippled hands.eBefore the shut staring eyes.[Of it too if of all trs to:] if of all Ofit too.The [xx] shut staring eyes.Where <too> but there too?Ask no more <not>.<Or ask in vain.>D[In margin:  and S]<Source <Germ> of all.>VOLUME WORSTWARD HOB Here back the better worse to fail the head said seat of all.   [-]   Of all?   If of all ofit too.   Where but there it too.   Within that sunken head the sunken head.   Thecrippled hands.   The shut staring eyes.   Shadow with other shadows.   In the samedim.   The same little void.   Before its shut staring eyes.   Where too but theretoo?   Ask not.   [-]   Or ask in vain.   Better worse so.C Next on back the better worse to fail the head said seat of all.   [-]   All?   If of all ofit too.   Where if not there it too?   There in the sunken head the sunken head. The hands.   The eyes.   Shade with the other shades.   In the same dim.   Thesame narrow void.   Before the staring eyes.   Where it too if not there too?   Asknot.   No.   Ask in vain.   Better worse so.D On back the better worse to fail the head said seat of all.   Germ of all.   All?   If ofall of it too.   Where if not there it too?   There in the sunken head the sunken head. The hands.   The eyes.   Shade with the other shades.   In the same dim.   Thesame narrow void.   Before the staring eyes.   Where it too if not there too?   Asknot.   No.   Ask in vain.   Better worse so.E On back better worse to fail the head said seat of all.   Germ of all.   All?   If of allof it too.   Where if not there it too?   There in the sunken head the sunken head. The hands.   The eyes.   Shade with the other shades.   In the same dim.   Thesame narrow void.   Before the staring eyes.   Where it too if not there too?   Asknot.   No.   Ask in vain.   Better worse so.BaIf they can go.bThose hanThat head. Those <with> eyes.Those <and> hands.a<One shadow.bAnother shadow.>[x] Say no.They <It> cannot go. <It cannotgo.>Unless <Till> dim go.aThe kneeling one.bThe old man & child.cThe head.dThe hands.eThe eyes [they plague?].,[Go dim trs to:] dim Go for good.All go for good.CaThat head with eyes and hands.Oh dim go<.><Go> for good.All <go> for good.D[In margin:  and D]VOLUME WORSTWARD HOB Ask not if it can go.   That head with eyes and hands.   Say no.   Unasking no.   Itcannot go.   Till dim go.   Then all go.  , Dim go for good.  a Good and all.   Allfor good.   Good & all.C [-]   Ask not if it can go.   Say no.   Unasking no.   It cannot go.   Till dim go. Then all go.   Oh dim go.   Go for good.  a Good and all.   All go for good. Good and all.D [-]   Ask not if it can go.   Say no.   Unasking no.   It cannot go.   Save dim go. Then all go.   Oh dim go.   Go for good.  a Good and all.   All go for good. Good and all.E The head.   Ask not if it can go.   Say no.   Unasking no.   It cannot go.   Savedim go.   Then all go.   Oh dim go.   Go for good.   All for good.   Good and all.D[In margin:  and W]aFar far better.BAsk not. Or better ask & not <Orin <In> vain> reply.Or rather reply <Or not in vainwith <if> answer> no knowing.<Far far> Better worse so.CWhose words.<?>Or not in vain with answer <ifsay> no knowing.No words for him whose words<soever>.Him.<?>No words for one whose words<soever>.<One?aWait.It.No words for it whose words.>VOLUME WORSTWARD HOB Whose words?   Ask in vain.   Or not in vain if answer no knowing.    No saying. No words for him whose words.   Him?  a Wait.   One.   No word for one whosewords.   [-]   [-]   [-]   Far far better worse so.C Whose words?   Ask in vain.   Or not in vain if say no knowing.   No saying.   Nowords for him whose words.   Him?  a Wait.   One.   No words for one whosewords.   One?  a Wait.   It.   No words for it whose words.   Better worse so.a Far far better.D Whose words?   Ask in vain.   Or not in vain if say no knowing.   If say no saying. No words for him whose words.   Him?   One.   No words for one whose words. One?   It.   No words for it whose words.   Better worse so.E Whose words?   Ask in vain.   Or not in vain if say no knowing.   No saying.   Nowords for him whose words.   Him?   One.   No words for one whose words. One?   It.   No words for it whose words.   Better worse so.CSomething not quite wrong withone.Short for the one. <The kneelingone.>As henceforth <As from now>two for the two <the twain>.<The <as one> plodding two<twain>.As from now> Three for head witheyes and hands. <[xxxx]> <assaid.>So for short henceforth <as fromnow>.The world long ago. | [f. ]Bi[Cancelled by means of diagonal lines.]Something not quite wrong withshadow one.Namely meaning [xx] The standingone.Short for it.As shadow two for the two.The two as <in> one.And three for the three.Head hands eyes.aAs one.So [termed?] <for short> hence-forth.aAh henceforth.Bii<Something not quite wrong withone.Short for the one.[-]As henceforth two for the two.[-]Three for the head with eyes &hands.[-]So for short henceforth.>Time to [xxxx] <lose>.Gain time to [xxxxx] lose.D[In margin:  and S//]<One for> T<t>he kneeling one.<From now one for the kneelingone.>As from now three for <the>head<.><The head> as <ﬁrst> said <formissaid>.VOLUME WORSTWARD HOB[ii] Something not quite wrong with one.   Short for the one.   [-]   As henceforth twofor the two.   [-]   Three for the head with eyes & hands.   [-]   So for shorthenceforth.   For to gain time.   Time to lose.   Gain time to lose.  a To have tolose.   As the soul long ago.   The world long ago.C Something not wrong with one.   Short for the one. The kneeling one.   [-]   As asfrom now two for the twain.   The as one plodding twain.   As from now three forhead as said.   [-]   So for short as from now.   For to gain time.   Time to lose. Gain time to lose.   As the soul long ago.   The world long ago.D Something not wrong with one.   One for the kneeling one.   From now one forthe kneeling one.   As from now two for the twain.   The as one plodding twain. As from now three for the head.   The head as ﬁrst said for missaid.   So as fromnow.   For to gain time.   Time to lose.   Gain time to lose.   As the soul once. The world once.E Something not wrong with one.   Meaning - meaning! - meaning the kneeling one. From now one for the kneeling one.   As from now two for the twain.   The as oneplodding twain.   As from now three for the head.   The head as ﬁrst said missaid. So from now.   For to gain time.   Time to lose.   Gain time to lose.   As the soulonce.   The world once.B<So on.>CSomething then not quite wrongwith one.D[In margin: ]Something then not wrong withone.So <on>.VOLUME WORSTWARD HOB Something then not quite wrong with one.   Then with two.   Then with three. So on.  , Something far from wrong with all.   Far far from wrong.C Something then not wrong with one.   Then with two.   Then with three.   So on., Something far from wrong with all.   Far far from wrong.D Something not wrong with one.   Then with two.   Then with three.   So on., Something far from wrong with all.   Far far from wrong.E Something not wrong with one.   Then with two.   Then with three.   So on. Something not wrong with all.   Far from wrong.   Far far from wrong.CRoom for disimprovement<worse>.Or better worse alas say still some<little> night to come.BHow <almost> true too often they<sometimes> ring!aSo far.<So> [xxx.] Say alas the night isyoung & take heart.Or better worse say alas there is stillsome night to go <come>.And take heart. | [f. r]D[In margin:  and W]VOLUME WORSTWARD HOB The words too whosesoever.   Room for disimprovement.   How almost true theysometimes ring!   How wanting in inanity!   So say alas the night is young & takeheart.   Or better worse alas still some night to come.   [-]   And take heart.C The words too whosesoever.   Room for worse.   How almost true they sometimesring!   How wanting in inanity!   So say alas the night is young and take heart.   Orbetter worse alas say still some little night to come.   [-]   And take heart.D The words too whosesoever.   What room for worse!   How almost true theysometimes ring!   How wanting in inanity!   Say alas the night is young and takeheart.   Or better worse alas say still a watch of night to come.   One watch.   Andtake heart.E The words too whosesoever.   What room for worse!   How almost true theysometimes almost ring!   How wanting in inanity!   Say the night is young alas andtake heart.   Or better worse say still a watch of night alas to come.   A rest of lastwatch to come.   And take heart.CSomething there somewhere notquite wrong.The - .<Pending worse still>Too soon. <Add?><Never.>Right <Deep> down.Truncate sooner <Cut oﬀ sooner>.Higher.BaNo try on [sic] fail.aIts - bad.bIts -.cStop.dNot dwell on mere bad.Pending worst <worse still>.a<Wait.Add a-.[-]No.aToo soon.First> B<b>ow it down.Cut oﬀ <Truncate> higher.Headless legless <Topless baseless>sunken [xxxxx] hindtrunk.[Seen?] In the dim void.On unseen knees.Pending worse<t> still.D[In margin:  and S]First <one.First> try fail better one.aNo try not fail.Enough of <a pox on> bad.Cut oﬀ higher. <Cut oﬀ black coatarse high.><On unseen knees>EPending worse still. | [f. ]VOLUME WORSTWARD HOB, First then try fail better one.  a No try on fail.   Something there somewhere notquite wrong.   Not that as it is it is not bad.   Its no face bad.   Its no hands bad. Its -.   Enough.  Enough of bad.   Mere bad.   Way for worse.   Pending worsestill.   First worse.   [-]   [-]  a Wait.   Add a-.   [-]   No.  a Too soon.   Firstbow it down.   [-]   Right down.   Head gone.   [-]   Truncate higher.  Nothing from pelvis down.   Nothing but bowed back.   Topless baseless sunkenhindtrunk.   Dim black.   In the dim void.   [-]   Better worse so.   Pendingworst still.E First one.   First try fail better one.   Something there badly not wrong.   Not thatas it is it is not bad.   The no face bad.   The no hands bad.   The no - .   Enough. A pox on bad.   Mere bad.   Way for worse.   Pending worse still.   First worse. Mere worse.   Pending worse still.   Add a - .   Add?   Never.   Bow it down. Be it bowed down.   Deep down.   Head in hat gone.   More back gone. Greatcoat cut oﬀ higher.   Nothing from pelvis down.   Nothing but bowed back. Topless baseless hindtrunk.   Dim black.   On unseen knees.   In the dim void. Better worse so.   Pending worse still.D First one.   First try fail better one.  a No try no fail.   Something there somewherenot wrong.   Not that as it is it is not bad.   The no face bad.   The no hands bad., The - enough.   Enough of <a pox on> bad.   Mere bad.   Way for worse. Pending worse still.  First worse.   Mere worse.   Pending worse still.   Add a -no.   Add?   Never.   Bow it down.   [-]   Deep down.   Head gone.   Lessback.   Cut oﬀ black coat arse high.   Nothing from pelvis down.   Nothing butbowed back.   Topless baseless hindtrunk.   Dim black.   In the dim void.   Onunseen knees.   Better worse so.   Pending worse still.C, First then try fail better one.  a No try no fail.   Something there somewhere notwrong.   Not that as it is it is not bad.   The no face bad.   The no hands bad. The -   Enough.   Enough of bad.   Mere bad.   Way for worse.   Pending worsestill.   First worse.   Mere worse.   Pending worse still.  a Wait.   Add a - .  a No. Add?   Never.   Bow it down.   [-]   Deep down.   Head gone.   [-]   Cutoﬀ sooner.   Nothing from pelvis down.   Nothing but bowed back.   Toplessbaseless hindtrunk.   Dim black.   [-]   In the dim void.   Better worse so. Pending worse still.B[Place and date of composition are entered asParis,  December .]aBad the no [xxxxxxx] the noheadway.Bad the - <empty hands>CBad the - .D[In margin:  and S]Bad and all as they are as they are.Bad the no - | [f. ]VOLUME WORSTWARD HOB Next then try fail better two.   The twain.   Bad and all as they are as they are.a Bad the no headway.   Bad the - empty handsC Next then try fail better two.   The twain.   Bad and all as they are as they are.a Bad the no headway.   Bad the -D Next try fail better two.   The twain.  Bad as they are as they are.   Bad the no -E Next try fail better two.   The twain.   Bad as it is as it is.   Bad the no -BNot yet <[it?]> in its turn <for> toworsen.aIn that shadow.CBut ﬁrst <on> back to shadow<shade> three.Not yet in its turn for to worsen.Be that shadow<e> again.In that shadow<e> again.With its other shadows<es>.Worsening shadow<e>s.D[In margin:  and S]Clenched eyes glued to <clampedon> clenched staring eyes.VOLUME WORSTWARD HOB But ﬁrst back to shadow three.   Not yet [it?] in its turn to worsen.   Only be thereagain.  a Brieﬂy again.   There in that head in that head.   Be it again.   That head inthat head.   Clenched eyes glued to it alone.   [-]   [-]   [-]   [-]   To the sunkskull.   The crippled hands.   Clenched staring eyes.   Clenched eyes glued to theclenched staring eyes.   Be that shadow again.   In that shadow again.   In the dimvoid.   With its other shadows.   Worsening shadows.C But ﬁrst on back to shade three.   Not yet to worsen.   Only be there again.a Brieﬂy again.   There in that head in that head.   Be it again.   That head in thehead.   Clenched eyes glued to it alone.   Alone?   No.   Too.   [-]   To the sunkskull.   The crippled hands.   Clenched staring eyes.   Clenched eyes glued toclenched staring eyes.   Be that shade again.   In that shade again.   In the dim void. With its other shades.   Worsening shades.D But ﬁrst on back to three.   Not yet to worsen.   Simply be there again.  a Brieﬂyagain.   There in that head in that head.   Be it again.   That head in that head. Clenched eyes glued to it alone.   Alone?   No.   [-]   To it too.   The sunkenskull.   The crippled hands.   Clenched staring eyes.   Clenched eyes clamped onclenched staring eyes.   Be that shade again.   In that shade again.   In the dim void. With the other shades.   Worsening shades.E First back on to three.   Not yet to try worsen.   Simply be there again.   There inthat head in that head.   Be it again.   That head in that head.   Clenched eyes clampedto it alone.   Alone?   No.   Too.   To it too.   The sunken skull.   The crippledhands.   Clenched staring eyes.   Clenched eyes clamped to clenched staring eyes. Be that shade again.   In that shade again.   With the other shades.   Worseningshades.   In the dim void.CSuch as now next in its turn the - .D[In margin: ]VOLUME WORSTWARD HOB Such as now next in its turn the -C Such as now next -D Such as next -E Next -B<But> See ﬁrst [how?] - say ﬁrsthow all [xxxxx] at once together.And what yet <still> to worsen.a<To try [xx] better fail.bFail better fail.>CBut see ﬁrst - say ﬁrst how all atonce together.And what still <yet> to worsen.Together <All at once> in that onestare.D[In margin: S and ]Clenched eyes glued to <clampedon> all.VOLUME WORSTWARD HOB But see ﬁrst - say ﬁrst how all at once together.   In that stare.   The worsened one. The worsening two.   And what  still to worsen.  a To try better fail.  b Fail betterfail.   [-]   Itself.   The dim.   The void.   Together in that open stare.   Eyesclenched glued to all.C But see ﬁrst - say ﬁrst how all at once.   In that stare.   The worsened one.   Theworsening two.   And what yet to worsen.   To try worsen.   Itself.   The dim. The void.   All at once in that one stare.   Eyes clenched glued to all.D But ﬁrst how all at once.   In that stare.  The worsened one.   The worsening two. And what yet to worsen.   To try worsen.   Itself.   The dim.   The void.   All atonce in that stare.   Clenched eyes clamped on all.E First how all at once.   In that stare.   The worsened one.   The worsening two. And what yet to worsen.   To try worsen.   Itself.   The dim.   The void.   All atonce in that stare.   Clenched eyes clamped to all.B<From bad too bad to [........].aToo merely bad.bHow?cWait.>The [boots?] boots.CAnd so to <Next then> two too.Now f<F>rom bad to worsen.No. <Add?>Now the <two> right.Now the <two> left.D[In margin:  and S]Next then two.VOLUME WORSTWARD HOB And so to two too.   Which now from bad how worsen?   Try worsen.   From badtoo bad to [........].  a Too merely bad. b How?  c Wait.   Add-.   [-]   No.  a Toosoon.   The boots.   Better worse bootless.   Bare heels.   Now the left.   Now theright.   Left right left right on.   Barefoot unreceding on.   Better worse so.   Orlittle better worse than nothing so.C Next then two.   From bad to worsen.   Try worsen.   From merely bad.  a Wait. Add - .   Add?   Never.   The boots.   Better worse bootless.   Bare heels.   Nowthe two right.   Now the two left.   Right left right left on.   Barefoot unrecedingon.   Better worse so.   A little better worse than nothing so.D Next two.   From bad to worsen.   Try worsen.   From merely bad.   Add - no. Add?   Never.   The boots.   Better worse bootless.   Bare heels.   Now the tworight.   Now the two left.   Left right left right on.   Barefoot unreceding on. Better worse so.   A little better worse than nothing so.E Next two.   From bad to worsen.   Try worsen.   From merely bad.   Add - . Add?   Never.   The boots.   Better worse bootless.   Bare heels.   Now the tworight.   Now the two left.   Left right left right on.   Barefoot unreceding on. Better worse so.   A little better worse than nothing so.BcClenched eyes for [xxx] <[use?]>within.[xxxx] <Right> it & away | [f. r]with them.Turn to <full> face if not alreadyso.Skull & eyes <stare> alone.In its narrow void. [Xxxx]<Scene> & seer of all.CSo <to> <Next> the so-said seatof all.aNot much <Little> not wrongthere. The s<S>kull to harbour all.Clenched eyes to see within. Theskull within. The inward staringeyes. Li Not much <Little> toworsen there.The <Those> hands perhaps.<!>The<at> sunkenness <head!>That commonplace <platitude><[inanity?] ﬂower!> <foul ﬂower><true ring!>!Right it and away <begone><away> with them. <Unsay themaway.>Turn f <F>ull face if not alreadyso. <[Raise?] it & rid of them.><Full face from no [sic].No hands. No fa>D[In margin:  and S]Next the so-said seat <& source>of all.VOLUME WORSTWARD HOB So to the seat of all.  a Not much not wrong there.  b The skull to harbour all.c Clenched eyes for within.  d The skull within.  e The inward staring eyes.  f Little toworsen there.   The hands perhaps.   The sunkenness.  a There the weakness.  b Sunkon crippled hands!   That commonplace!   Right it & away with them.   Turn fullface if not already so.   [-]   No face.   Skull & stare alone.   Scene & seer of all.C Next the so-said seat of all.  a Little.  Those hands!   That head!  a Sunk on crippledhands!   That true ring!   [-]   Full face from no.   No hands.   No face.   Skull andstare alone.   Scene and seer of all.D Next the so-said seat & source of all.   Those hands!   That head!  a Sunk oncrippled hands!   That true ring!   [-]   Full face from now.   No hands.   No face. Skull and stare alone.   Scene and seer of all.E Next the so-said seat and germ of all.   Those hands!   That head!   That near truering!   Away.   Full face from now.   No hands.   No face.   Skull and stare alone. Scene and seer of all.BSee <Stare> on.Say [gone?] <on>.Be [one?] <on>.<Somehow on.>D[In margin: ]<Anyhow on.>VOLUME WORSTWARD HOB On.   Stare on.   Say on.   Be on.   Somehow on.   [-]   Till dim gone.   [-]   Allgone.   For bad & all.   For better worse & all.C On.   Stare on.   Say on.  a Say and unsay on.   Be on.   Somehow on.   [-]   Tilldim gone.   At long last gone.   All at long last gone.   For bad and all.   For betterworse and all.D On.   Stare on.   Say on.   Be on.   Somehow on.   Anyhow on.   Till dim gone. At long last gone.   All at long last gone.   For bad and all.   For poor best worseand all.E On.   Stare on.   Say on.   Be on.   Somehow on.   Anyhow on.   Till dim gone. At long last gone.   All at long last gone.   For bad and all.   For poor best worseand all.B[Notes on facing page (f. v): four paragraphs,three of which are (individually) cancelled,while the last paragraph, of a single line oftext, is left uncancelled: Faint light whenceunknown. High & low. Far & wide.That old dim? Since when what other? // On. See on. Say on. Be on. Somehowon. Till dim gone. All gone. For bad &all. For better worse and all. // When allalways faintly <to be> seen of the littleto be seen. Where nothing [xxxxxx] [tobe ever?] to be unseen. Nothing of thelittle to be seen ever to be unseen [xx] // At itself staring in itself.]<Unchanging.>Suppose a <black> pipe in thatvoid.That [xx] old dim.a[Xxxxxx] <Where> all seen.Nothing unseen.,Where <with such stare> allalways to be seen of the little to beseen. Where nothing to be unseen.CClosed at either end. <Sealed.>Then in that black pipe same<that> faint light.Since when what other <else>?Where with such stare all always tobe seen.Of the little <nothing> to be seen.Nothing ever to be <not> unseen.Of the little <nothing> to be seen.Faintly seen<.>Worsen that? | [f. ]D[In margin:  and D]Faint <Dim> light {Faint light »Dim light} whence unknown.Saw Say a pipe in that void.Then in that pipe or tube that<self>same faint <dim> light.{faint light » dim light}Faintly Dimly seen.Nothing ever not unseen.EDimly see<n>.VOLUME WORSTWARD HOB Faint light whence unknown.   [-]   Unchanging.   [-]   High & low.   Far & wide. Suppose a black pipe in that void.   [-]   Closed at either end.   Then in that blackpipe same faint light.   Old dim.   Since when what other?  , Where with suchstare all always to be seen of the little to be seen.   Faintly to be seen.   Nothing to beunseen.  , Nothing of the little faintly to be seen ever to be unseen.   Worsen that?C Faint light whence unknown.   At all costs unknown.   Unchanging.   [-]   Highand low.   Far and wide.   Say a black pipe in that void.   [-]   Sealed.   Then inthat black pipe that faint light.   Old dim.   Since when what else?   Where allalways to be seen.   Of the nothing to be seen.   Faintly seen.   Nothing ever notunseen.   Of the nothing to be seen.   Faintly seen.   Worsen that?D Dim whence unknown.   At all costs unknown.   Unchanging.   [-]   Far and wide. High and low.   Say a pipe in that void.   A tube.   Sealed.   Then in that pipe ortube that selfsame dim.   Old dim.   Since when what else?   Where all always to beseen.   Of the nothing to be seen.   Dimly seen.   Nothing ever unseen.   Of thenothing to be seen.   Dimly seen.   Worsen that?E Dim whence unknown.   At all costs unknown.   Unchanging.   Say nowunchanging.   Far and wide.   High and low.   Say a pipe in that void.   A tube. Sealed.   Then in that pipe or tube that selfsame dim.   Old dim.   When everwhat else?   Where all always to be seen.   Of the nothing to be seen.   Dimly seen. Nothing ever unseen.   Of the nothing to be seen.   Dimly seen.   Worsen that?B<So to> The so-said void.aShades in their own right <uncast>in that shadeless lack of light<dim>.bAnd yet void.Well missaid <void>.Shade-[cluttered?] <haunted><haunted> void.CSo to <Next> the so-said void.Cluttered <Rife> with shades.Shade-encumbered <ridden> void.D[In margin:  and V]How better worse missay? worseso-missay?VOLUME WORSTWARD HOB So to the so-said void.   Missaid.   That narrow ﬁeld.   Cluttered with shades.a Shades in uncast in that shadeless dim.   Well missaid void.   Shade-haunted void. How better worse missay?C Next the so-said void.   Missaid.   That narrow ﬁeld.   Rife with shades.  a Uncastin shadeless dim.   Well missaid void.   Shade-ridden void.   How better worsemissay?D Next the so-said void.   The so-missaid.   That narrow ﬁeld.   Rife with shades. Well so-missaid.   Shade-ridden void.  How better worse so-missay?E Next the so-said void.   The so-missaid.   That narrow ﬁeld.   Rife with shades. Well so-missaid.   Shade-ridden void.   How better worse so-missay?VOLUME BNot to Nothing to those so farseen.a[xxxxx] With the blind stare seewith them others.Say if need [xxx] be with themothers.<At long last go.>D[In margin: ]Till if need be <needs must>.If need be <s must>.CWait. Add if need be <[of?]>others. <Add?Never.Till if needed. <need be.>>.Faintly so far. Such as say a humpto one. A limp <third> to two. Amouth to three. No. Never.Them only lessen. If anythinglessen. Better worse <than noth-ing> so.But to them as they lessen others.As they worsen. With the blindstare say with them others.Say if need be with them <Ifneeded> <Need of> others.aIf need be <needed> <need be>.Only if need be <needed>.WORSTWARD HOB Add others.   [-]   Add if need be others.   Nothing to those so far seen.   Faintlyseen.  a Such as say a hump to one.  b A limp to two.  c A mouth to three.  d No. Never.   Them only lessen.  a If anything lessen.  b Better worse so.   But to them asthey lessen others.   As they worsen.  a With the blind stare see with them others. Say if need be with them others.  a In the dim void.   Others to lessen.   Toworsen.  a If need be.  b Only if need be.   Till dim go.   At long last go.   Forworst & all.C Add others.   Add?   Never.   Till if need be.   Nothing to those so far.   Faintly sofar.  Them only lessen.   But as they lessen others.   As they worsen.   [-]  a In thedim void.   Others to lessen.    To worsen.  a If need be.   Till dim go.   At longlast go.   For worst and all.D Add others.   Add?   Never.   Till if needs must.   Nothing to those so far.   Dimlyso far.   Them only lessen.   But with them as they lessen others.   As they worsen. If needs must.  a In the dim void.   Others to lessen.   To worsen.   Till dim go. At long last go.   For worst and all.E Add others.   Add?   Never.   Till if needs must.   Nothing to those so far.   Dimlyso far.   Them only lessen.   But with them as they lessen others.   As they worsen. If needs must.   Others to lessen.   To worsen.   Till dim go.   At long last go. For worst and all.VOLUME B<So on.><From the void.>In the skull all [but?] <save> theskull gone.<Unchanged.>[xxx] First one.CFaintly <Dimly> seen.Faintly <Dimly> seen.<Unchanged.>D[In margin: ]Dimly seen? seen.EIn the skull all bu[x] <save> theskull gone.WORSTWARD HOB On.   Somehow on.   Anyhow on.   Say not gone.   So on.   In the skull all gone. All?   No.   All cannot go.   Till dim go.   Say then but the two gone.   In theskull one and two gone.   From the void.   From the stare.   In the skull all save theskull gone.   The stare.   Alone in the dim void.   Alone to be seen.   Faintly seen. In the skull the skull alone to be seen.   The staring eyes.   [-]   By the staringeyes.  a In the dim void.   The others gone.   Long gone.   Then back. Unchanged.   [-]   First one.   Then two.   Or ﬁrst two.   Then one.   [-] >C On.   Somehow on.   Anyhow on.   Say all gone.   So on.   In the skull all gone. All?   No.   All cannot go.   Till dim go.   Say then but the two gone.   In theskull one and two gone.   From the void.   From the stare.   In the skull all save theskull gone.   The stare.   Alone in the dim void.   Alone to be seen.   Dimly seen. In the skull the skull alone to be seen.   The staring eyes.   Dimly seen.   By thestaring eyes.  a In the dim void.   The others gone.   Long gone.   Then back. Unchanged.   [-]   First one.   Then two.   Or ﬁrst two.  Then one.   [-] >D On.   Somehow on.   Anyhow on.   Say all gone.   So on.   In the skull all gone. All?   No.   All cannot go.   Till dim go.   Say then but the two gone.   In theskull one and two gone.   From the void.   From the stare.   In the skull all save theskull gone.   The stare.   Alone in the dim void.   Alone to be seen.   Dimly seen. In the skull the skull alone to be seen.   The staring eyes.   Dimly seen.   By thestaring eyes.   The others gone.   Long gone.   Then back.   Unchanged.   [-] First one.   Then two.   Or ﬁrst two.   Then one.   Or both together. >E On.   Somehow on.   Anyhow on.   Say all gone.   So on.   In the skull all gone. All?   No.   All cannot go.   Till dim go.   Say then but the two gone.   In theskull one and two gone.   From the void.   From the stare.   In the skull all save theskull gone.   The stare.   Alone in the dim void.   Alone to be seen.   Dimly seen. In the skull the skull alone to be seen.   The staring eyes.   Dimly seen.   By thestaring eyes.   The others gone.   Long sudden gone.   Then sudden back.  Unchanged.   Say now unchanged.   First one.   Then two.   Or ﬁrst two.   Thenone.   Or together. >VOLUME BBack [xx] together in the skull.<Unchanged.>In the dim void. | [f. r]D[In margin: ]Dimly seen? seen.Stare glued to <clamped on> all.WORSTWARD HOB>  Then all again together.   The bowed back.   The plodding twain.   The skull. The stare.   Back together in the skull.   Unchanged.   Stare glued to all.   In thedim void.C>  Then all again together.   The bowed back.   The plodding twain.   The skull. The stare.  Back in the skull together.   Unchanged.   Stare glued to all.   In thedim void.D>  Then all again together.   The bowed back.   The plodding twain.   The skull. The stare.   All back in the skull together.   Unchanged.   Stare clamped on all. In the dim void.E>  Then all again together.   The bowed back.   The plodding twain.   The skull. The stare.   All back in the skull together.   Unchanged.   Stare clamped to all. In the dim void.VOLUME B[xxxxx] Time -D[In margin: ]WORSTWARD HOB The eyes.   Time -C The eyes.   Time -D The eyes.   Time to -E The eyes.   Time to -VOLUME BDim to go must go for [xxxxxx.]ever.Two <too> [xxxxx] [not?] <can><can go not> for ever. [Order ofchanges unclear. First reading was Two[xxxxx] [not?] for ever.]Three cannot go <no> if not forever.Void cannot go <no> if not forever.With all gone for ever.D[In margin:  and D]But ﬁrst <on> back to unsay dimcan go.If not for good. | [f. ]EGo [on?] <no>.If not for good. | [f.]CBut ﬁrst [back <on> trs to:] <on>back to unsay dim can go.<Dim cannot go.>Dim to go must go forever <forgood>. [In margin: and all, encircled,with a question mark beside it, thewhole cancelled.]If only <but> for ever <good>.One can go not for ever <forever><for good>.Two too not for ever <forever>.{Two too not for ever. » Two toonot forever. » Two too.}Three no if not forever <forgood>.With dim gone forever <forgood>.Void no if not forever <for good>.With all gone forever <for good>.If not forever <for good>.WORSTWARD HOB But ﬁrst back to unsay dim can go.   [-]   [-]   Dim to go must go for ever.   Truethen dim can go.   If but for ever.   One can go not for ever.   Two too can not forever.   Three no if not for ever.   With dim gone for ever.   Void no if not for ever. With all for ever.   Dim can worsen.   [-]   Go no.   If not for ever.C But ﬁrst on back to unsay dim can go.   [-]  Dim cannot go.   Dim to go must go forgood.   True then dim can go.   If but for good.   One can go not for good.   Twotoo.   Three no if not for good.   With dim gone  for good.   Void no if not forgood.   With all gone for good.   Dim can worsen.   [-]   Go no.   If not forgood.D But ﬁrst on back to unsay dim can go.   Somehow on back.   Dim cannot go.   Dimto go must go for good.   True then dim can go.   If but for good.   One can go notfor good.   Two too.   Three no if not for good.   With dim gone for good.   Voidno if not for good.   With all gone for good.   Dim can worsen.   Somehowworsen.   Go no.   If not for good.E First on back to unsay dim can go.   Somehow on back.   Dim cannot go.   Dim togo must go for good.   True then dim can go.   If but for good.   One can go not forgood.   Two too.   Three no if not for good.   With dim gone for good.   Void noif not for good.   With all gone for good.   Dim can worsen.   Somehow worsen. Go no.   If not for good.VOLUME B[Notes on facing page (f. v): twoparagraphs, individually cancelled:Worsening words / All pupil & white. // Dim black holes.][xxxxxxx] Time to worsen.<How?>a<Wait.>To open.aInward open.bTime to [see?] staring open.bSo bettered for the worse. [Boxdrawn around sentence.]<Dim black holes.>Unwavering inward gaping.aSo better than nothing bettered forthe worse.xxxxx Say them from now for everso.So b<B>etter than nothing <so>bettered for the worse.C[A short wavering horizontal line divides thisfrom the previous paragraph; signiﬁcanceunclear.]aWait.Open. Rid of lids. <Unlid.><White?No.aNo white.All pupil.>bFaintly <Dimly> so.From now forever say them so.So b<B>etter than nothing <so>bettered for the worse.D[In margin: ]Time to <try> worsen.<Somehow worsen.>From now s<S>ay them so.<From now so.>WORSTWARD HOB The eyes.   Time to worsen.   How?  a Wait.   Open.  a Rid of lids.   Say staringopen.  b Time to [see?] staring open.   All white & pupil.   [-]   [-]   [-]   [-]a With them so worsened see them so.  c Faintly so.   Dim black holes Unwavering gaping.   Say them from now for ever so.   With worsening words. [-]   Better than nothing so bettered for the worse.C The eyes.   Time to worsen.   [-]   Unlid.   Say staring open.   a Time to see staringopen.   All white and pupil.   [-]   White?   No.  a No white.   All pupil.  a Withthem so worsened see them so.  b Dimly so.   Dim black holes.   Unwaveringgaping.   From now say them so.  With worsening words.   [-]   Better thannothing so bettered for the worse.D The eyes.   Time to try worsen.   Somehow worsen.   Unlid.   Say staring open. All white and pupil.   [-]   White?   No.   All pupil.   Dim black holes. Unwavering gaping.   Say them so.   With worsening words.   From now so. Better than nothing so bettered for the worse.E The eyes.   Time to try worsen.   Somehow try worsen.   Unclench.   Say staringopen.   All white and pupil.   Dim white.   White?   No.   All pupil.   Dim blackholes.   Unwavering gaping.   Be they so said.   With worsening words.   Fromnow so.   Better than nothing so bettered for the worse.VOLUME B[Note on facing page (f. v), cancelled bymeans of a diagonal line: Say from now asseen by way of on]While Still dim needs must <still>on.Worsened<ing> [stare?]To say <For> the nothing to besaid. See the nothing to bes<S>een.Faintly <seen> [xxx x xxxxxxxxxxxxxx] <[xxxxxxx]><[xxxxxxxxxx]> shades.As now by way of on where in the[xxxx] nowhere all when so nowtogether.[xxx] The barefoot plodding twain.a<So faintly> Say from now<faintly> so seen by way of on.C<Anyhow on.><For the nothing to be said.>For <At> the nothing to be said.S<s>een.Faintly Dimly seen.As now by way of on where in thenowhere all as now together.a<Say &> See and say somehowwhere there by way of on.<Where there.> All three as lastsaid seen.aFaintly say from now so faintly<dimly> seen<.>bb<B>y way of on.In that narrow void vasts of voidapart.Worsen better later. | [f. ]D[In margin:  and S//]Anyhow. Anyhow on.Where there all three as last said<worse> seen.EAs now by way of somehow onwhere in the nowhere all to-gether.<?>Where there all three as last worseseen.<?>WORSTWARD HOB Still dim still on.   So long as still dim somehow still on.   [-]   With worseningwords.   Worsening [stare?].   For the nothing to be said. Seen.   [-]   Faintly seen. As now by way of on where in the nowhere all when so now together.   All threetogether.  a See and say somehow [where?] by way of on.   All three as last said seen. The bowed back alone.   The barefoot plodding twain.   The skull & lidless stare. Where in that narrow vast.   Say only vasts apart.  a So faintly say from now faintlyso seen by way of on.   In that narrow void vasts of void apart.   Worsen better later.C Still dim still on.   So long as still dim somehow still on.   Anyhow on.   Withworsening words.   Worsening stare.   For the nothing to be said.   At the nothing tobe seen.   Dimly seen.   As now by way of on where in the nowhere all together. All three together.  a Say & see somehow where by way of on.   Where there. Allthree as last said seen.   Bowed back alone.   Barefoot plodding twain.   Skull andlidless stare.   Where in the narrow vast.   Say only vasts apart.  a Faintly say fromnow so dimly seen.  b By way of on.   In that narrow void vasts of void apart. Worse better later.D Still dim still on.   So long as still dim somehow still on.   Anyhow on.   Withworsening words.   Worsening stare.   For the nothing to be seen.   At the nothing tobe seen.   Dimly seen.   As now by way of on where in the nowhere all together. All three together.   Where there all three as last worse seen.   Bowed back alone. Barefoot plodding twain.   Skull and lidless stare.   Where in the narrow vast. Say only vasts apart.   In that narrow void vasts of void apart.   Worse better later.E Still dim still on.   So long as still dim still somehow on.   Anyhow on.   Withworsening words.   Worsening stare.   For the nothing to be seen.   At the nothing tobe seen.   Dimly seen.   As now by way of somehow on where in the nowhere alltogether?   All three together.   Where there all three as last worse seen?   Bowedback alone.   Barefoot plodding twain.   Skull and lidless stare.   Where in thenarrow vast?   Say only vasts apart.   In that narrow void vasts of void apart. Worse better later.VOLUME BWhat when words [xxxx]<[xxxx]> <go?> <What then?>No words for what when wordsstop <then>.Say [xx] <none the less> by way ofon <somehow> with sight to do.aSudden no more seen all for thatstare to see.bNothing gone.cSudden nothing seen.[xx] Still dim & yet [xxxxxxx][...].What then? What words for<what> then?No words for <what> then.No words for what when when nowords. <go><For what> When nohow on.CWhat when words go <gone><gone>?No words <None> for what then.Still dim and yet - .D[In margin:  and W]With lo<e>ss of sight.WORSTWARD HOB What when words go? What then?   No words for what then.   Say none the less byway of on somehow with sight to do.   Somehow with loss of sight.   Still dim & yet[...].   No.   Nohow on so.   Say better worse words go when nohow on.   Dim still& nohow on.   All seen & nohow on.   What then? What words for what then? No words for what then.   No words for what when words go.   For what whennohow on.   [-]C What when words gone?   None for what then.   But say by way of somehow onsomehow with sight to do.   With loss of sight.   Still dim and yet -   No.   Nohowon so.   Say better worse words gone when nohow on.   Dim still and nohow on. All seen and nohow on.   What words for what then?   None for what then. No words for what when words gone.   For what when nohow on.   [-]D What when words gone?   None for what then.   But say by way of somehow onsomehow with sight to do.   With less of sight.  , Still dim and yet - no.   Nohow onso.   Say better worse words gone when nohow on.   Still dim and nohow on.   Allseen and nohow on.   What words for what then?   None for what then.   Nowords for what when words gone.   For what when nohow on.   [-]E What when words gone?   None for what then.   But say by way of somehow onsomehow with sight to do.   With less of sight.   Still dim and yet - .   No.   Nohowso on.   Say better worse words gone when nohow on.   Still dim and nohow on. All seen and nohow on.   What words for what then?   None for what then.   Nowords for what when words gone.   For what when nohow on.   Somehow nohowon.VOLUME B[Note on facing page (f. v):  [As worsethey may said to say trs to:] said to say Asworse they may]Worsening words whose<whence> <whose> unknown.<Whence unknown>.[Here?] <unknown> to say asworst they may only they onlythey.Nothing save | [f. r] what theysay.aWorse & worse for no knownreason say.aEver worse for no known reason.bSome<how> fail to say.CAs worst they may fail worse everworse to say.D[In margin: ]What they <say>.WORSTWARD HOB Worsening words whose unknown.   Whence unknown.   At all costs unknown. [Here?] unknown to say as worst they may only they only they.   Dim void shades allthey.   Nothing save what they say.   Somehow say.   Nothing but they.   What theysay.   Whosesoever whencesoever say.   As worst they may fail ever worse to say.C Worsening words whose unknown.   Whence unknown.   At all costs unknown. Here to say as worst they may only they only they.   Dim void shades all they. Nothing but what they say.   Somehow say.    Nothing but they.   What they say. Whosesoever whencesoever say.   As worst they may fail ever worse to say.D Worsening words whose unknown.   Whence unknown.   At all costs unknown. Here to say as worst they may only they only they.   Dim void shades all they. Nothing save what they say.   Somehow say.   Nothing save they.   What they say. Whosesoever whencesoever say.   As worst they may fail ever worse to say.E Worsening words whose unknown.   Whence unknown.   At all costs unknown. Now for to say as worst they may only they only they.   Dim void shades all they. Nothing save what they say.   Somehow say.   Nothing save they.   What they say. Whosesoever whencesoever say.   As worst they may fail ever worse to say.VOLUME B[Notes on facing page (f. v), cancelled bymeans of a single diagonal line: Something<Such left> of mind then somehowsomewhere still. If not how words? Evensuch words. Such left to joy-. Joy.]Somewhose somewhere <some-how> still.[If somehow?] <No mind &>words?<So so much still.>D[In margin:  and W]Enough still to joy<.>j<J>oy!aEnough still to -j<J>ust enough still to joy that onlythey.aJoy!CSo much then <remains> of mindstill.<Enough>Somewhose somewhere somehow<enough> still<!>So so much <remains> <enough>still.aSay so much still <remains><enough> <just enough>.Enough still to joy - .<just> Enough still to - . <Just>Enough still to joy that only they.WORSTWARD HOB So much then of mind still.   [-]   Somewhose somewhere somehow still.   Nomind & words?   Even such words.   So so much still.   Enough still to joy -.   Joy! Enough still to -. Enough still to joy that only they.  a All only they.   Joy!   [-]C So remains of mind still.   Enough.  Somewhose somewhere somehow enough still! No mind and words?   Even such words.   So enough still.  a Say enough.   Enoughstill to joy -   Joy!   Just enough still to -  Just enough still to joy that only they.  a Allonly they.   [-]  a Joy!D Remains of mind then still.   Enough still.   Somewhose somewhere somehowenough still.   No mind and words?   Even such words.    So enough still.   Enoughstill to joy.   Joy!   Just enough still to joy that only they.  a All only they.   Only!E Remains of mind then still.   Enough still.   Somewhose somewhere somehowenough still.   No mind and words?   Even such words.   So enough still.   Justenough still to joy.   Joy!   Just enough still to joy that only they.   Only!VOLUME BNot to know what they said say.What it is they words it secretessay.No saying. No knowing what it isthe words it secretes say.No saying what it <all> is theysay.D[In margin:  and W]The so-said seat <& source> of all.No saying what it all it<s> theysomehow say.WORSTWARD HOB Enough still not to know.   Not to know what they say.   What it is the words it sayssay.   Says?   Secretes.   Say better worse secretes.   What it is the words it secretes say.a Somehow secretes still.   What the so-said void.   The so-said dim.   The so-saidshades.   The so-said seat of all.   Enough to know no knowing.   No knowingwhat it is the words it secretes say.   No saying.   No saying what it all is they say.C Enough still not to know.  Not to know what they say.   Not to know what it is thewords it says say.   Says?   Secretes.   Say better worse secretes.   What it is the wordsit secretes say.  a Somehow secretes still.   What the so-said void.   The so-said dim. The so-said shades.   The so-said seat of all.   Enough to know no knowing. No knowing what it is the words it secretes say.   No saying.   No saying what itall is they somehow say.D Enough still not to know.   Not to know what they say.   Not to know what it isthe words it says say.   Says?   Secretes.   Say better worse secretes.   What it is thewords it secretes say.   What the so-said void.   The so-said dim.   The so-saidshades.   The so-said seat & source of all.   Enough to know no knowing.   Noknowing what it is the words it secretes say.   No saying.   No saying what it all isthey somehow say.E Enough still not to know.   Not to know what they say.   Not to know what it isthe words it says say.   Says?   Secretes.   Say better worse secretes.   What it is thewords it secretes say.   What the so-said void.   The so-said dim.   The so-saidshades.   The so-said seat and germ of all.   Enough to know no knowing.   Noknowing what it is the words it secretes say.   No saying.   No saying what it all isthey somehow say.VOLUME B[Notes on facing page (f. v): fourparagraphs, individually cancelled: Preyingsince last said on the [xxx] above-saidmind. On that faint mind faintly preying.// What [xxx] of all said seen & said noton it faintly preying? // But most of allsay perhaps a little most of all the oldman & child- That since [xxx xx] lastsaid seen. // True but <and yet say>ﬁrst the worst in need. the perhaps [xx]worst of all say perhaps a little worst ofall the old man & child. True & yet sayﬁrst the worst the perhaps a little worstof all the old man & child. The worst inneed of worsening]<That said> Back now by way ofon to say the plodding twain.a[On?] it on itself preying.,,<Say> True & yet say most of allsay perhaps a little most of all theold man & child.Plodding <Right left right left>barefoot unreceding on.In the dim void. [xxxxx] Thosewere then the words.CThat said <on> back now by wayof on to say the plodding twain.Shade preying since last<re><worse > said on theabovesaid <aforesaid> mind.aOn that faint mind faintly preying.,,Say t<T>rue < true! True> <-true! -> {Say true » [True - true!True?] » True - true! - } and yetsay most of all say perhaps a little<shade> most of all the old manand child.That shade as last [seen?] <worse[re?]>said seen.Those were then the words.Of all the <Least> worse <of allthe worse> failed shades.D[In margin:  and S]Shade preying since last worse saidon the <what> remains of mind.But what not on it <them> <it>preying?,,True - true! - and yet say most ofall say <worst> perhaps most<worst> of all the old man andchild.WORSTWARD HOB That said back now by way of on to say the plodding twain.   Shade preying since lastsaid on the abovesaid mind.  a On that faint mind faintly preying.   But what not on itpreying?   What seen?   What said?   What of all said seen & said not on it faintlypreying?  a [On?] it on itself preying.  ,, Say true & yet say most of all say perhaps alittle most of all the old man & child.   That shade as last said seen.   Right left rightleft barefoot unreceding on.   Those were then the words.   Back to them now forwant of better on and better fail.   Worser fail that perhaps of all the least.   Of all theworse failed shades.   Less worse than the bowed back alone. >C That said on back to say the plodding twain.   Shade preying since worse said onaforesaid mind.  a On faint mind faintly preying.   But what not on it preying?   Whatseen?   What said?   What of all said seen and said not on it faintly preying?  a On iton itself preying.  ,, True - true! - and yet say most of all say perhaps most of all theold man and child.   That shade as worse said seen.   Right left right left barefootunreceding on.   Those then the words.   Back to them now for want of better onand better fail.   Worser fail that perhaps of all the least.   Least worse of all the worsefailed shade.   Less worse than the bowed back alone. >D That said on back to try worse say the plodding twain.   Shade preying since lastworse said on what remains.   But what not on it preying?   What seen?   What said? What of all said and seen not on it preying?  a On it on itself preying.  ,, True -true! - and yet say worst perhaps worst of all the old man and child.   That shade aslast worse said seen.   Left right left right barefoot unreceding on.   They then thewords.   Back to them now for want of better on and better fail.   Worser fail thatperhaps of all the least.   Least worse of all the worse failed shades.   Less worse thanthe bowed back alone. >E That said on back to try worse say the plodding twain.   Preying since last worse saidon foresaid remains.   But what not on them preying?   What seen?   What said? What of all seen and said not on them preying?   True.   True!   And yet say worstperhaps worst of all the old man and child.   That shade as last worse seen.   Leftright left right barefoot unreceding on.   They then the words.   Back to them nowfor want of better on and better fail.   Worser fail that perhaps of all the least.   Leastworse failed of all the worse failed shades.   Less worse than the bowed back alone. >VOLUME B[xxxx xxxxx xxx xxxxx xx.] Of -C<What> T<t>hough they too forworsening.But what not for worsening?,,Say t<T>rue < true! True><- true! -> {Say true » [True -true! True?] » True - true! - } andyet say ﬁrst the worst the perhaps alittle <shade> {a little » a shade »Ø} worst of all the <the> old manand child.Worst in need of worsening.DThough they too due for worse.But what not due for worse.<?>EWorse in- [John Calder prints Worstin—; Grove Press prints worse in—;the editorial choice is Worst in—.]WORSTWARD HOB>  The skull & lidless stare.   Though they too for worsening.   But what not forworsening?  ,, Say true & yet say ﬁrst the worst the perhaps a little worst of all theold man & child.   Worst in need of worsening.   Of -C>  The skull and lidless stare.   What though they too for worse.   But what not forworse?  ,, True - true! - and yet say ﬁrst the worst perhaps worst of all the old manand child.   Worst in need of worse.   Of -D>  The skull and lidless stare.   Though they too for worse.   But what not forworse?  ,, True - true! - and yet say ﬁrst the worst perhaps worst of all the old manand child.   Worst in need of worse.   Worst in -E>  The skull and lidless stare.   Though they too for worse.   But what not forworse.   True.   True!   And yet say ﬁrst the worst perhaps worst of all the old manand child.   Worst in need of worse.   Worse in -VOLUME BSay blank as <when> somehow onsay blank [xxxxx] for nohow on.Blanks how long till somehowagain on?<Again on.>No t<T>ime <gone> whennohow on.CSay blank when <no sooner>somehow on say blank when <for>nohow on.D[In margin: , B and a cross, x, across theheight of the lower two of three lines oftypescript (covering sentences -).]Time gone when nohow on. | [f. ]WORSTWARD HOB Say blank when somehow on say blank for nohow on.   All blanks for nohow on. How long?   Blanks how long till somehow on?   Again on.   All gone whennohow on.   Time gone when nohow on. C Say blank no sooner somehow on say blank for nohow on.   All blanks for nohowon.  How long?   Blanks how long till somehow on.   Again on.   All gone whennohow on.  Time gone when nohow on.D But ﬁrst say blank no sooner nohow on.   All blanks for nohow on.   How long? Blanks how long till somehow on?   Again somehow on.   All gone when nohowon.   Time gone when nohow on.E Blanks for nohow on.   How long?   Blanks how long till somehow on?   Againsomehow on.   All gone when nohow on.   Time gone when nohow on.VOLUME B[Notes on facing page (f. v), deleted by adiagonal line: [More?]  Worse is <is> less.<For want of better less.> And yet less isbest. No. Best? No. [x] Naught is best.Best worse? Best worse. Less best worse.Say less best worse. <Less? No. Least.Say least best worse. Say least bestworse.> Le<a>st never to be naught.Never to xxxx <bring to> naught bebrought. Never by naught be stilled<nulled>. Unstillable<nullable> least.Say that best least. worst. Withleastbound words say least best worst.<For want of better worst.> [xxx]unstillable unnullable least.]Never <By no stretch> more.Naught is best.Least. | [f. ]Least [x] best worse. [On facing page(f. v), without insertion mark:leastmost]Never to [x] naught be brought.Never by [xx] naught nulled.For want of better <worser> worst.Unnullable <Unlessenable> leastbest worse.CBest worse?<.>Unnullable <Unlessenable> leastbest worse. | [f. ]D[In margin: ]aBest?aLess?Never by naught <be> nulled.ESay that best worse. [John Calderprints Say that best worst.; GrovePress prints Say that best worse.; theeditorial choice is Say that bestworse.]For want of worser worst. [BothJohn Calder and Grove Press print Forwant of worser worst.; the editorialchoice is For want of worser worse.]Unlessenable least best worse. | [f. ]WORSTWARD HOB Worse less.   By no stretch more.   Worse for want of better less.   Yet less best.a Best?   No.   Naught best.   Best worse?   No.   Not best worse.   Naught notbest worse.   Less best worse.  a Less?   No.   Least.   Least best worse.  a Sayleast best worse.   Least never to be naught.   Never to naught be brought.   Neverby naught nulled.   Unnullable least.   Say that best worst.   With leastening wordssay least best worse   For want of worser worst.   Unlessenable least best worse.C Worse less.   By no stretch more.   Worse for want of better less.   Yet less best.a Best?   No.   Naught best.   Best worse.   No.   Not best worse.   Naught notbest worse.   Less best worse.  a Less?   No.   Least.   Least best worse.   Leastnever to be naught.   Never to naught be brought.   Never by naught nulled. Unnullable least.   Say that best worse.   With leastening words say least bestworse.   For want of worser worse.   Unlessenable least best worse.D Worse less.   By no stretch more.   Worse for want of better less.   Less best.   No. Naught best.   Best worse.   No.   Not best worse.   Naught not best worse.   Lessbest worse.   No.   Least.   Least best worse.   Least never to be naught.   Neverto naught be brought.   Never by naught be nulled.   Unnullable least.   Say thatbest worse.   With leastening words say least best worse.   For want of worser worse. Unlessenable least best worse.E Worse less.   By no stretch more.   Worse for want of better less.   Less best.   No. Naught best.   Best worse.   No.   Not best worse.   Naught not best worse.   Lessbest worse.   No.   Least.   Least best worse.   Least never to be naught.   Neverto naught be brought.   Never by naught be nulled.   Unnullable least.   Say thatbest worse.   With leastening words say least best worse.   For want of worser worst. Unlessenable least best worse.VOLUME B [Notes on facing page (f. v), cancelledby means of diagonal lines: There the[.......] as when ﬁrst said the head.<Sunk> On crippled hands! Thatplatitude.]Bi [Cancelled by means of diagonal lines,together with the two following paragraphs(Bi and Bia).][-][Xxxx xxxxx] The hands.[-]There the ﬂower. Say there the[........] <foul ﬂower>.As when ﬁrst said the head.Sunk on crippled hands!Those were then the words.That ﬂower. For For That [xxxxxxxx] and here held holding hands!These Those the words when twoﬁrst said. Shade two ﬁrst said.Ununsaid when next said resaid.Away with them.aUnsay & away.Held holding hands!Bii [In the MS this paragraph appearsfollowing Bia.]There the ring <that almost <traceof true> ring>. Say there the truering.Sunk on crippled hands!<.>True ringing words. And here heldholding hands!Away. Unsay them away.<Begone.>C<The twain><Held holding [handings?]>There t<T>hat almost ring.Those <They> there then thewords.Here now <now> held holding.Shade two ﬁrst said seen.Ununsaid when re<worse >said.D[In margin:  and S]That almost ring.<!>As when shade two ﬁrst said.WORSTWARD HOB[ii] [-]   The hands.   [-]   There that trace of true ring.   As when ﬁrst said the head. Sunk on crippled hands.   Those then the words.   And here held holding hands! The words when two ﬁrst said. Shade two ﬁrst said.   Ununsaid when resaid. Begone.   Held holding hands!C The twain.   The hands.   Held holding [handings?].   That almost ring.   As whenthe head ﬁrst said.   Sunk on crippled hands.   Crippled hands!   They there then thewords.   Here now held holding.   The words when two ﬁrst said.   Shade two ﬁrstsaid.   Ununsaid when worse said.   Away.   Held holding hands!D The twain.   The hands.   Held holding hands.   That almost ring!   As when ﬁrstsaid on crippled hands the head.   Crippled hands!   They there then the words. Here now held holding.   As when ﬁrst said.   Ununsaid when worse said.   Away. Held holding hands!E The twain.   The hands.   Held holding hands.   That almost ring!   As when ﬁrstsaid on crippled hands the head.   Crippled hands!   They there then the words. Here now held holding.   As when ﬁrst said.   Ununsaid when worse said.   Away. Held holding hands!VOLUME B[Notes on facing page (f. v), cancelled bymeans of diagonal lines: The empty too.Gone too. No. Unsay [xx] No hands inthat dim. No. Leave for later. Unsay later.When again somehow on. Say for nowstill seen. Faintly seen. Dim white in thedim void. Two empty hands. Dim whitein the dim void.]Bi [Cancelled by means of diagonal lines,together with previous (Bi) and following(Bia) paragraphs.]The empty too.[X] Gone too.No hands in the dim. void. Helpingor otherwise.Bia [Cancelled by means of diagonal linestogether with previous two paragraphs (Biand Bi).][Xxxxx] better worse so.BiiGone <Gone> too.No hands in that <the> dim.Leave <Save> for worse to come.When again <Somehow worsexxx> somehow on. <Worse tocome>CWorse somehow on to come.Faintly <Dimly> seen.>D[In margin:  and S],No hands in the - n<N>o.<Somehow> W<w>orse some-how to say.Dimly see. [sic]E[xxxxxx] Dimly seen.WORSTWARD HOB[ii] The empty too.   Gone too.   No hands in the dim.   No.   Save for worse tocome.   Somehow on. Worse to come.   Say for now still seen.   Faintly seen.   Dimwhite.   Two empty hands.   Dim white in the dim void.C The empty two.   Away.   No hands in the - .   No.   Save for worse to come. Worse somehow to come.  Say for now still seen.   Dimly seen.   Dim white. Two empty hands.   Dim white in the dim void.D The empty too.   Away.   No hands in the -   No.   Save for worse to say. Somehow worse somehow say.   Say for now still seen.   Dimly see.   Dim white. Two dim white empty hands.   In the dim void.E The empty too.   Away.   No hands in the - .   No.   Save for worse to say. Somehow worse somehow to say.   Say for now still seen.   Dimly seen.   Dimwhite.   Two dim white empty hands.   In the dim void.VOLUME B[Notes on facing page (f. v), cancelled bymeans of diagonal lines: Leastward on. Solong as dim <still>. Dim undimmed. Ordimmed to dimmer dim <still>. Todimmest<most> dim. Leastmost indimmest<most> dim. Utmost dim.Leastmost in utmost dim. Ideal worst.]aIdeal worst. <Best worse of all.>CSo long as <While> dim still.Utmost dim. Uttermost dim.Leastmost in uttermost dim.[Unworsenable worst.?]Unworsenable worst.D [In margin:  and D]So leastward on <ho>.WORSTWARD HOB Leastward on.   So long as dim still.   Dim undimmed.   Or dimmed to dimmerstill.   To dimmost dim.   Leastmost in dimmost dim.   Utmost dim.   Leastmost inutmost dim.  a Best worse of all.   Unworsenable worst.C So leastward on.   Dim still.   Dim undimmed.   Or dimmed to dimmer still.   Todimmost dim.   Leastmost in dimmost dim.   Utmost dim.   Leastmost in utmost dim. Unworsenable worst.D So leastward ho.   So long as dim still.   Dim undimmed.   Or dimmed to dimmerstill.   To dimmost dim.   Leastmost in dimmost dim.   Utmost dim.   Leastmost inutmost dim.   Unworsenable worst.E So leastward on.   So long as dim still.   Dim undimmed.   Or dimmed to dimmerstill.   To dimmost dim.   Leastmost in dimmost dim.   Utmost dim.   Leastmost inutmost dim.   Unworsenable worst.VOLUME BIn utmost dim to utter <unutter>leastmost all.CWhat words for <what> then?How almost <all but uninane.D[In margin:  and W]As somehow from some soft ofmind they drip <ooze>.From it in it drip <ooze>.WORSTWARD HOB The words for then.   How they still ring. How true still ring.   As somehow fromthe mind they drop. Drip.   From it in it drip.   How uninane.   How slow toleasten.  a To their unlessenable least.  b Unworsenable worst.   In utmost dim tounutter leastmost all.C What words for what then?   How almost they ring.   Still ring.   As somehow fromsome soft of mind they drip.  From it in it drip.   How all but uninane.   To lastunlessenable least how loath to leasten.   For then in uttermost dim to unutterleastmost all.D What words for what then?   How almost they still ring!   As somehow from somesoft of mind they ooze.   From it in it ooze.   How all but uninane.   To lastunlessenable least how loath to leasten.   For then in utmost dim to unutter leastmostall.E What words for what then?   How almost they still ring.   As somehow from somesoft of mind they ooze.   From it in it ooze.   How all but uninane.   To lastunlessenable least how loath to leasten.   For then in utmost dim to unutter leastmostall.VOLUME B[Note on facing page (f.v): they plodapart]So <[xxxx] but> little for theworse with hands away  <the> the[sic] old man & child.Hands away between them nowgone they plod apart.Not widen yet the narrow room<rift>.Save for <when> after nohowsomehow worser on.C<Held> Hands gone <the heldholding hands> they plod apart.[Right left trs to:] left Right bare-foot unreceding on.Save from for some after nohowsomehow worser on.D[In margin:  and S]So little the worse the old man andchild.aNot widen yet the rift.Not widen <worsen> yet the rift.WORSTWARD HOB So but little for the worse the old man & child.   Hands gone they plod apart. Right left right left unreceding on.   Not widen yet the rift.   Save for when afternohow somehow worser on.C So but little the worse the old man and child.  Gone the held holding hands theyplod apart.   Left right barefoot unreceding on.   Not widen yet the rift.   Save forsome after nohow somehow worser on.D So little worse the old man and child.   Gone held holding hands they plod apart. Left right barefoot unreceding on.   Not worsen yet the rift.   Save for some afternohow somehow worser on.E So little worse the old man and child.   Gone held holding hands they plod apart. Left right barefoot unreceding on.   Not worsen yet the rift.   Save for some afternohow somehow worser on.VOLUME BAs <just> now to shade two.<Just> worsened as above.And now say next | [f. r] forworse the stare & skull aliter shadethree.[Worse?] wanting [xxxx] <worse>the skull <preying on foresaid mindsince ﬁrst said seen.>[xxxx] <Fastened to> it alone &staring eyes <stare> the stare.Blurs in its [xxxx] ﬁeld shades one &bowed back & twain.C<On> Back now for want of betteron to unsay glued to all the stare.No but to now this now that<alone>.,As just now <last> to shade two asjust now <last> worsened. Justnow! Now without more say nextfor worse shade three or skull andstare. Here more in want of worsethe skull preying on foresaid mindsoft since ﬁrst said seen. <Last saidworse seen. [xxxx] said worse seen.><Now dart from worsened twain tonext in want of worst or skull &stare alone.><Of the  worse in want the skullpreying on soft since vertex ﬂat.>Bowed back alone and twain blursin the ﬁeld <void>.[At this point the typescript continues withparagraphs Ci, Ci and Ci, which arecancelled together by means of diagonal lines.They are reproduced (in genetic rather thantyped sequence) below as ﬁrst drafts of C,C and C below.]D[In margin:  and S]On back to unsay glued to<clamped on> all the stare.No but to now this now that. thatalone.Now dart from worsened twain tonext for worse<.>or <To> skull and stare alone.Of the two worse in want the skullpreying on soft since vertex ﬂat<unbowed> <unsunk<bowed>>.Glued to it <Clamped thereon>and stare alone the stare.Bowed back alone <alone> andtwain blurs in the void.WORSTWARD HOB Back now for want of better on to unsay glued to all the stare.   No but now to thisnow to that.   As just now to shade two.   Just worsened as above.   And now saynext for worse the stare & skull aliter shade three.   [Worse?] wanting worse the skullpreying on foresaid mind since ﬁrst said seen.   So say the fore alone.   No dome. Temple to temple alone.   Fastened to it alone & stare the stare.   Blurs in its ﬁeldbowed back & twain.   So better than nothing worse shade three from now.C On back to unsay glued to all the stare.   No but to now this now that alone.  , Nowdart from worsened twain to next in want of worst or skull & stare alone.   Of the worse in want the skull preying on soft since vertex ﬂat.   So say the fore alone.   Nodome.   Temple to temple alone.   Glued to it alone and stare the stare.   Bowed backalone and twain blurs in the void.   So better than nothing worse shade three fromnow.D On back to unsay clamped on all the stare.   No but to now this now that alone. Now dart from worsened twain to next for worse.   To skull and stare alone.   Ofthe two worse in want the skull preying on soft since unbowed.   So say the forealone.   No dome.   Temple to temple alone.   Clamped thereon and stare alone thestare.   Bowed back alone and twain blurs in the void.   So better than nothingworse shade three from now.E On back to unsay clamped to all the stare.   No but from now to now this and nowthat.   As now from worsened twain to next for worse alone.   To skull and starealone.   Of the two worse in want the skull preying since unsunk.   Now say the forealone.   No dome.   Temple to temple alone.   Clamped to it and stare alone thestare.   Bowed back alone and twain blurs in the void.   So better than nothingworse shade three from now.VOLUME B[Notes on facing page (f. v): threeparagraphs, the ﬁrst cancelled by means of onediagonal line, and the third by two diagonallines: No next for worse // In as // Sopoor best a shade the worse from nowthat [bowed?] shade a woman’s. An oldwoman’s.]Nothing to show a woman’s but<and yet> a woman’s.D<Ad>rip from softening soft ofmind the word woman’s.The words nothing to show thatbowed back <alone> a woman’sand yet a woman’s.So [for?] best a shade the worsefrom now that shade <back><shade> a woman’s.CAfter nohow again somehow again[back on trs to:] on back to thebowed back alone.The words nothing to show thatbowed back alone a woman’s andyet a woman’s.So a shade the worse from now thatshade a woman’s.An old woman’s.D[In margin:  and S]Adrip <Oozed> from softening softthe word woman’s.<The words> N<n>othing toshow bowed back a woman’s andyet a woman’s.EThe words nothing to show bowedback <alone> a woman’s and yet awoman’s.WORSTWARD HOB After nohow again somehow again back on to the bowed back alone.   Nothing toshow a woman’s yet a woman’s.   Adrip from softening soft of mind the wordwoman’s.   The words old woman’s.   The words nothing to show that bowed backalone a woman’s and yet a woman’s.  a An old woman’s.   So [for?] best a shade theworse from now that shade a woman’s.   An old woman’s.C Somehow again on back to the bowed back alone.   Nothing to show a woman’s andyet a woman’s.   Adrip from softening soft of mind the word woman’s.   The wordsold woman’s.   The words nothing to show bowed back alone a woman’s and yet awoman’s.   So a shade the worse from now that shade a woman.   An old woman.D Somehow again on back to the bowed back.   Nothing to show a woman’s and yet awoman’s.   Oozed from softening soft the word woman’s.   The words old woman’s. The words nothing to show bowed back a woman’s and yet a woman’s.   So worsefrom now that shade a woman.   An old woman.E Somehow again on back to the bowed back alone.   Nothing to show a woman’s andyet a woman’s.   Oozed from softening soft the word woman’s.   The words oldwoman’s.   The words nothing to show bowed back alone a woman’s and yet awoman’s.   So better worse from now that shade a woman’s.   An old woman’s.VOLUME B[Notes on facing page (f. v): a paragraphcancelled by means of diagonal lines: Say seenow <[try say now trs to:] now try sayand see> how dim undimmed may<to> worsen. Dim whence unknown.And say see <for now> how nohowdim save dimmer still to worsen. So ﬁrstsay see how better worsen for now say<see> only dimmer still. But <but> ashade. So as when somehow on forbetter worse to dimmer still. Till utmostdim. Undimmable whence unknowndim. Best worse of all. Save somehowundimmed better worse.][And say?] <Say add> nohow fornow save dimmer still.But but a shade. So as when some-how on <again> for better <worseagain> to dimmer still.CSay now try <Next fail> say andsee how dim undimmed to worsen.aDim whence unknown.Say add <How> n<N>ohow fornow save dimmer still.But but a shade. So as when some-how on again for better worse<again> to dimmer still.Till utmost uttermost dim.aUndimmable whence unknowndim.Save somehow undimmed worserstill. | [f. ]D[In margin:  and D]Best wor bad worst of all.WORSTWARD HOB Say now try say & see how dim undimmed to worsen.  a Dim whence unknown. Say add nohow for now save dimmer still.   But but a shade. So as when somehowon again for better worse again to dimmer still.   Till utmost dim.  a Undimmablewhence unknown dim.   Best worse of all.   Save somehow undimmed worser still.C Next fail say and see how dim undimmed to worsen.   How nohow save dimmerstill.   But but a shade. So as when somehow on again again to dimmer still.   Tillutmost dim.    Best worst of all.   Save somehow undimmed worser still.D Next fail say and see how dim undimmed to worsen.   How nohow save dimmerstill.   But but a shade so as when somehow on again to dimmer still.   Till utmostdim.   Best bad worst of all.   Save somehow undimmed worser still.E Next fail see say how dim undimmed to worsen.   How nohow save to dimmer still. But but a shade so as when after nohow somehow on to dimmer still.   Till dimmostdim.   Best bad worse of all.   Save somehow undimmed worser still.VOLUME B[Notes on facing page (f. v): twoparagraphs, cancelled by means of diagonallines: Words again to say again the vastsapart. In such narrow void such vasts ofvoid apart. // Back now again & wordsagain not to unsay but say again the vastsapart.]Bi[Xxxxx] in such narrow void suchvast of void apart.BiiBack now again & <with> wordsagain not to unsay but say again thevasts apart.<Say seen again.>Of all so far [un?]<mis>said thebest missaid ill said and least <ofall> to worsen.aWords again for [xx] <[xxx]<so>> forgotten words.bTo which [xxx] further[Remainder of b and following ﬁve sentencescancelled by means of diagonal lines(presumably intended to include the beginningof b); they are replaced by ‒ as in surfacetext.]badd [xx xxx].cBest missaid so far and no furtherfarther.Only when nohow more so missaymay best missaid be said.bSo So unsaying missay still.Then only when no further best[xxx] missaid. Poor best missaidsomehow missaid.<On> Back now again with dripsagain not to unsay but say again thevasts apart.Say seen again as ﬁrst said seen.aSuch narrow void.Such vasts of void apart.Of all so far mis<worse >said thebest mis<worse >said and least ofall to worsen unsay <worsen>.So far and no farther.Only when nohow moremis<worse >say may bestmis<worse >said be said.aNohow better mis<worse >say.Only then when nohow farther <on><on then> best mis<worse >said.Somehow at last unbetterably bestmis<worse >said.CiiBack words again <Drip on> backnow again not to unsay but sayagain the vasts apart.Of all so far missaid the worse<t>missaid and least of all to worsen.So far and no farther.Not till nohow more <worse>missay may <say> worse<t>missaid be said.a<Till> Nohow worse missay.Not till [now?] nohow fartherworst missaid. <on.>} Poor worstmissaid.D[In margin: ]Drip on <Ooze> back again not tounsay but say again the vasts apart.Not till nowhow [sic] worse missaysay worse missaid.Not till nohow on. P<p>oor worstmissaid.Ci[This paragraph occurs following C in theTS; it is cancelled, by means of diagonallines, together with Ci and Ci, whichfollow it; see note at C.]WORSTWARD HOB Back now again with words again not to unsay but say again the vasts apart.   Sayseen again.   [-]  a Such narrow void.   Such vasts of void apart.   Of all so far missaidthe best missaid and least of all to worsen.   So far and no farther.   Only when nohowmore missay may best missaid be said.  a Nohow better missay.   Then only whennohow further best missaid. Poor best somehow missaid.C[ii] Drip on back again not to unsay but say again the vasts apart.   Say seen again.   [-]a Such narrow void.   Such vasts of void apart.   Of all so far missaid the worstmissaid.   So far.   Not till nohow worse missay say worst missaid.   Not till nohowon. Poor worst missaid.D Ooze back again not to unsay but say again the vasts apart.   Say seen again.   [-]a The narrow void   The vasts of void apart.   Of all so far missaid the worst missaid. So far.   Not till nohow worse missay say worse missaid.   Not till nohow on poorworst missaid.E Ooze on back not to unsay but say again the vasts apart.   Say seen again.   Noworse again.   The vasts of void apart.   Of all so far missaid the worse missaid.   Sofar.   Not till nohow worse missay say worse missaid.   Not till for good nohow onpoor worst missaid.VOLUME Ba<Long> Lost the so-said mind tolongingBLonging the so-said so-missaid <so-said> mind long lost to longing.For faintiest. [sic]Unstillable vain <last of> longingstill.D[In margin: ]Longing the so-said mind <soft>long lost to longing.So far <so->missaid.Unstillable vain last of longing still.| [f. ]EUnstillable vain last of longing still.[John Calder prints Unstillable vain least oflonging still.; Grove Press printsUnstillable vain last of longing still.; theeditorial choice is Unstillable vain last oflonging still.]Ci[Paragraph cancelled, by means of diagonallines, together with Ci and Ci; see noteat Ci.]Longing the so-said mind long lostto longing.The so-missaid.So far missaid.Dint of long longing lost to long-ing.Long vain longing.And longing still.Faintly longing still.Faintly vainly longing still.For fainter still.For faintest.Faintly vainly longing for the leastof longing.Unlessenable least of longing.Unstillable vain last of longing still.CiiThe worst <Unlessenable least>of longing.WORSTWARD HOB Longing the so-said mind long lost to longing.   The so missaid.   So far missaid. Dint of long longing lost to longing.   Long vain longing.   Yet longing still. Faintly longing still.   Faintly vainly longing still.   For fainter still.   For faintest. Faintly vainly longing for the least of longing.   Unlessenable least of vain longing. Unstillable vain last of longing still.C[ii] Longing the so-said mind long lost to longing.   The so-missaid.   So far missaid. Dint of long longing lost to longing.   Long vain longing.   And longing still. Faintly longing still.   Faintly vainly longing still.   For fainter still.   For faintest. Faintly vainly longing for the least of longing.   Unlessenable least of longing. Unstillable vain last of longing still.D Longing the so-said mind long lost to longing.   The so-missaid.   So far so-missaid. Dint of long longing lost to longing.   Long vain longing.   And longing still. Faintly longing still.   Faintly vainly longing still.   For fainter still.   For faintest. Faintly vainly longing for the least of longing.   Unlessenable least of longing. Unstillable vain last of longing still.E Longing the so-said mind long lost to longing.   The so-missaid.   So far so-missaid. Dint of long longing lost to longing.   Long vain longing.   And longing still. Faintly longing still.   Faintly vainly longing still.   For fainter still.   For faintest. Faintly vainly longing for the least of longing.   Unlessenable least of longing. Unstillable vain last of longing still.VOLUME BaUnstillable vain longing Vainlonging go.Vain longing that vain longing go.| [f. r]Ba [Paragraph cancelled by means ofdiagonal lines. Notes on facing page (f. v):three paragraphs cancelled, the ﬁrst twotogether, and the third separately: On backto missay [xx]say resay stare & void. //Time worse to missay stare & void too[xxx] <[xx]> still as ﬁrst [mis?]said. //No. Those drips already.]Time <[Xxxx]> worse to missay[stare?] [x xxx] void too still as ﬁrstmissaid.aSo back to unsay dim can go.bDim to go must -.cNo.dThose drips already.eThat try for worse already.Ci[Paragraph cancelled, together with Ci andCi; see note at Ci.]Longing that all go.aShades go.Dim go.Void go.Vain longing go.Vain longing that vain longing go.Ciia<Shades go.> [Moved by means oftransposition symbol from originalposition between  and .]D[In margin:  and a cross (x) across theheight of the paragraph’s two lines.]WORSTWARD HOB Longing that all go.  a Shades go.   Dim go.   Void go.   Longing go.  a Vainlonging go.   Vain longing that vain longing go.C[ii] Longing that all go.   Dim go.   Void go.  a Shades go.   Longing go.  a Vainlonging go.   Vain longing that vain longing go.D Longing that all go.   Dim go.   Void go.  a Shades go.   Longing go.  a Vainlonging go.   Vain longing that vain longing go.E Longing that all go.   Dim go.   Void go.   Longing go.   Vain longing that vainlonging go.VOLUME B[Notes on facing page (f. v), cancelled bymeans of a diagonal line: Said is missaid.Wherever said said missaid meant. So fornow from now said alone. Not n Nomore now missaid said now missaid.From now the short said alone. Short formissaid.]Wherever said said <said> missaidmeant.No more now said <[and?]> nowmissaid.From <now> [xxx] short saidalone.CNo more <from now> now said<and> now missaid.From now short said alone.Short <Said> f<F>or missaid.D[In margin: ]<<For> Be it missaid.>EFor be missaid. | [f. ]WORSTWARD HOB Said is missaid.   Wherever said said said missaid.   So from now said alone.   Nomore now said [and?] now missaid.   From now short said alone.   Short for missaid. [-]C Said is missaid.   Wherever said said said missaid.   So from now said alone.   Nomore from now now said and now missaid.   From now said alone.   Said for missaid. [-]D Said is missaid.   Whenever said said said missaid.   So from now said alone.   Nomore from now now said and now missaid.   From now said alone.   Said for missaid. For be missaid.E Said is missaid.   Whenever said said said missaid.   From now said alone.   No morefrom now now said and now missaid.   From now said alone.   Said for missaid.   Forbe missaid.VOLUME B[Notes on facing page (f. v), cancelled bymeans of a diagonal line: Back is on. On ison and back too is on. Somehow on. Sofrom <now> back alone. No more nowback now back on. From now the shortback alone. Short for back on.]aOn is [xxx] <on> & back is on.No more now back [x] now backon.From now [xxx] short back alone.CaOn is on and back too is on.No more from now now back andnow [back on trs to:] on back.Short for [back on trs to:] on back.D[In margin: ]a<Or on alone.>No more from now now back andnow [on back trs to:] back on.Back for [on back trs to:] back on.WORSTWARD HOB Back is on.  a On is on & back is on.   Somehow on.   So from now back alone.   Nomore now back now back on.   From now short back alone.   Short for back on.   [-]C Back is on.   Somehow on.   So from now back alone.   No more from now nowback and now on back.   From now short back alone.   Short for on back.   [-]D Back is on.   Somehow on.   So from now back alone.   No more from now nowback and now back on.   From now back alone.   Back for back on.   [-]E Back is on.   Somehow on.   From now back alone.   No more from now now backand now back on.   From now back alone.   Back for back on.   Back for somehowon.VOLUME B[The handwriting in this section is unusuallydiﬃcult to decipher. Beckett may haveforgotten to delete B.–c. Notes on facingpage (f. v): () a paragraph which followsthe notes presented at Ba, not cancelled:Back to unsay worse by no stretch more.Unsay for [xxxx] worse [xxxx]<[xxxxx]> to less for want of better. ()four paragraphs, each except the last cancelledby means of a single diagonal line:  Could<might> not whatever be betterworsened said. [xxxxx] // As when anevening <after sundown> [xxx xx xxxx]stood still. Evening of Sundown ofsunless day. // Worse be. // [Some?]then in timeless now as when thattimeless day the sun stood still. To ?worsening now.][Bi]Redrip b<B>ack to unsay <bet-ter> worse by no stretch more.aUnsay <better> worse [xxxx xxxxx <perforce>] less for want ofbetter.bWere aught to be said were it notbetter <for missaid> worse said?c<Worse> Said as [xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx xxxxx]aforesaid for short.[Following section cancelled by means ofdiagonal lines.]dMore& more said the more thebetter worse.f[Illegible half line deleted.]gTake dim.[Bii]Might not [xxxxxxxxxxx] the [...] ?[........] said be better worse moresaid?Ci[Cancelled by means of diagonal lines.Question mark in margin, with a bar alongthe length of the paragraph to apply it to theentire paragraph.]Back [to?] unsay better worse by nostretch more.aUnsay b<B>etter worse <[xxx]>ever less for want of <worse>better.bWhy whatever said not betterworse more said?cMore and more said the more thebetter worse.dSaid for short as aforesaid.eTake dim.WORSTWARD HOB[i+ii] Back to unsay better worse by no stretch more.  a Unsay better worse less for want ofbetter.  b not better for missaid worse said?  c Worse said as  [Bii]   Might not the[...] ? [........] said be better worse more said?  a Said for short as aforesaid.  b More &more said the more the better worse.  c Take dim. >C[ii] Back unsay better worse by no stretch more.  b Take dim. >D Back unsay better worse by no stretch more. >E Back unsay better worse by no stretch more. >VOLUME BWere not more dim less light?[Xxxxx] Less dim more? If so thenof the two more better worse.aUttermost dim the goal. [Goal isencircled.]bIf dim <dim> light then more. If less.c<Less light.>dIf [xxxxx] <lack> of light then more.eMore lack.fThus on and no [sic] through less andless or more & more to uttermost.gNot utter.hUttermost.iAs when after sundown <the>earth stood still.jSundown of sunless day.Unsaid then better worse by nostretch more.Better worse may be more. Asmuch as less.aMore or less better worse.Worse what? Better worse what?The saying?The said?Same thing.Same nothing. [End of cancelled section.][Bii][More?] <If> dim less light & lessdim more then of the two morebetter worse.a<More or less>More or less better worse Worsewhat? Better worse what.better worse.aIf dim dim light Uttermost dim theaim.bIf dim dim light then less.cLess light.dIf lack of light then more.eMore lack.fSo on and on through less and less or<and> more and more to uttermost.gNot utter.hUttermost.iAs after sundown when the earthstood still.jSundown of sunless day.Unsaid then better worse by nostretch more.Better worse may no less than lessbe more.,More or less better worse.Worse what?The saying?The said.<?>Same thing.Same nothing.Cii [In margin.]If more less light [xxxx] less morethen of the two more better worse.aEver - ever! - [xxxx] ever more[dim?] more & more {ever more[dim?] » more & more} [xx] tillutmost dim <most.> {utmost dim »most} by dint of more and more.BaIf only [xxxxxxxx] in the skull <ghostof then> how far then [better?] on.aBehind the all-present stare. | [f. r]D[In margin: ]<Same next to <all but> nothing.>[All but encircled, a line pointing to marginalcomment: as good as? (Cf .]EThe said. [John Calder prints Thesaid?; Grove Press prints The said.;the editorial choice is The said? ]CiIf <more> dim less light and lessdim more then of the two moreWORSTWARD HOB[ii]>  If dim less light & less dim more then of the two more better worse.  a Uttermostdim the aim.  b If dim dim light then less.  c If lack of light then more.  d Thus on andon through less & less or more & more to uttermost.  e Not utter.  f Uttermost.  g Asafter sundown when the earth stood still.  h Sundown of sunless day.   Unsaid thenbetter worse by no stretch more.  a More or less.   Better worse may as much as less bemore.   Worse what?  a Better worse what.   The saying?   The said?   Same thing. Same nothing.   [-]Ba If only ghost of then how far then [better?] on.  a Behind the all-present stare.E>  If more dim less light then better worse more dim.   Unsaid then better worse byno stretch more.   Better worse may no less than less be more.   Better worse what? The say?   The said.   Same thing.   Same nothing.   Same all but nothing.C[ii]>  If more less light more better worse.   Unsaid then better worse by no stretchmore.   Better worse may no less than less be more.   Better worse what?   The said? The say?   Same thing.   Same nothing.   [-]D>  If more dim less light then more dim better worse.   Unsaid then better worse byno stretch more.   Better worse may no less than less be more.   Better worse what? The said?   The say?   Same thing.   Same nothing.   Same all but nothing.VOLUME Bi[Cancelled by diagonal lines.]No once in pastless now.No not <quite> none. Not quite<none>aNor <not quite> none in presentpastlessness.When if not once that close ofsunless day?,Those crippled hands when if notonce?aTwo onces here <Once one [&two.] <once two>> [Wavy under-line under Two onces here.]bOne now one then.cOne once now one once then.dOne so now as [xxx] near asnothing now still.eOne so then as if one once alive.<life>fOn earth at rest one sundown oncealive.gAt close of sunless day.BiiaNo[x] not quite none in presentpastlessness.bOnce so now as if [xxx] <now>still.cStill now. Once so then as if oncealive. <never.dNever once alive.>e<Never> On earth at rest onesundown once alive.aNo then.No not quite none.aNor not quite none in presentpastlessness.When if not once the sunless day?,The crippled hands when if notonce?aOne once then one once now.bOne so now as if still.cStill now.dOne so then as if never.eNever on earth at rest at close ofsunless day.Cii [In margin.]No once in timeless <pastless>now.[In margin; new paragraph; from here toCiii cancelled by means of diagonallines.] No not none.When if not once before worse[xxxxx xxx xxxxxx] the <[xxx]worsened> shades?Onceless alone the [v?] The dim[xxx xxxxx]C[The surface text is Ciii, but includes ‒afrom Cii, which Beckett left uncancelled,only revising the cancelled remainder (‒) asCiii.]Ci [Cancelled by means of diagonal lines.]No once in pastless now.D[In margin: ][New paragraph; in margin: ]EWhen if not once. [John Calderprints When if not once?; GrovePress prints When if not once.; theeditorial choice is When if not once?]WORSTWARD HOB[ii] [-]   No once in pastless now.  a No then.   No not quite none.  a No not quite nonein present pastlessness.   When if not once that sunless day?  , Those crippled handswhen if not once?  a One once then one once now.  b Once so now as if now still.c Once so then as if never.  d Never once alive.  e Never on earth at rest one sundownonce alive.  f At close of sunless day. >C[ii] No once.   No once in pastless now.  a No -C[iii] No not none.   When before less the shades?   The dim before more?   When if notonce? >D No once.   No once in pastless now.  a No -   No not none.   When before worsethe shades?   The dim before more?   When if not once? >E No once.   No once in pastless now.   No not none.   When before worse theshades?   The dim before more?   When if not once. >VOLUME The held holding hands.Some new almost once.Almost no longer now.Pending better worstward on.Cb [New paragraph.]No.Resay as ﬁrst best worse said.No new once there for now.Nothing there ever that was notalways <ever>.Shall not be always <ever>.Until it go.Nothing to more.Nothing to lessen.Nothing to worsen.Nothing of once in vain <void>until it go. | [f. ]Ba[Notes on facing page (f. v), cancelled bymeans of a diagonal line: [No?]. No newonce there. Nothing there that was notalways. Shall not be always. [Xxx]<Until> it go. <As ﬁrst best worsesaid.> [Insertion point unclear.] Nothing of[xxx] once in void until it go.]Back better worse to say the so-saidvoid. void too still as ﬁrst said forshort.hFor want of <Pending> <some-how> better worstward on.Bb[Notes on facing page (f. v), cancelled:Nothing to more. Nothing to lessen.Nothing to worsen.][Xxx] <No>a<Resay as ﬁrst best worse said.>Cii [In margin, cancelled by means ofdiagonal lines.]Onceless alone the void.,By no stretch less. Nor more.<more or less.>aNor worse. <By none worse.>Onceless till no more.Ciii [In margin; new paragraph.]<N>Or less.a<N>Or worse.Ca [This paragraph and Cb cancelledtogether by means of diagonal lines.]Back better worse to say the so-saidvoid too still as ﬁrst <ﬁrst>}<so->said for short.There too to forge some once.Some new once for now.Some trace of once as once as oncethe crippled hands.The lidded stare.DNor <By none> less.aNor <By none> worse.WORSTWARD HOB[ii]>  [-]   [-]   [-]   [-]Ba Back better worse to say the so-said void too still as ﬁrst said for short.   a There tooto forge some once.  b Some new once for now.  c Some sort of once as once as oncethe crippled hands.  d The lidded stare.  e The held holding hands.  f Some new almostonce.  g Almost no longer now.  h Pending somehow better worstward on.D>  Onceless alone the void.   By no stretch more.   By none less.  a By none worse. Onceless till no more.E>  Onceless alone the void.   By no stretch more.   By none less.   Onceless till nomore.C[iii]>  Onceless alone the void.   By no stretch more.   Nor less.  a Nor worse. Onceless till no more.Bb No.  a Resay as ﬁrst best worse said.  b No new once there for now.  c Nothing thereever that was not always.  d Shall not be always.  e Until it go.  f Nothing to more.g Nothing to lessen.  h Nothing to worsen.  i Nothing of once in void until it go.VOLUME B[S?]<T>o unsay then all gone.The dim [x].a<All there as now.>bSimply nohow on.a[Xxx] <Only> words gone. <Sim-ply words gone.>b[xxx xx xxx] <such time as> dripdrip again on [xxxxxx xx xxx.]cSomehow drip on.d[Xxxx x xxxxx.]eThe dim.fThe void.gSimply say nohow onhAll there as [xxxx] now.Simply words Drip drip again gone.CDrip drip again to worsen blanks.All there <Nothing gone> andnohow on.aAll there as now.D[In margin: ]Drip again <Ooze back> to worsenblanks.Nothing <All not> gone.Nothing <All not> gone andnohow on.The shades. <not gone.>Drip <Ooze> gone.Till drip <ooze> again and on.Somehow drip <ooze> on.WORSTWARD HOB Drip drip again to worsen blanks.   Blanks when nohow on.   To unsay then all gone.a Time gone.  b No.   Nothing gone.   Simply nohow on.   All there & nohow on. All there the same as now when somehow on.   The shades.   The dim.   Thevoid.  h All there as now.   Simply words gone.   Drips gone.   Till drip drip againon.  a Somehow on.   Somehow drip [on?].C Drip again to worsen blanks.   Then when nohow on.   To unsay then all gone. Nothing gone.   Only nohow on.   Nothing gone and nohow on.   All there thesame as now when somehow on.   The shades.   The dim.   The void.   Only wordsgone.   Drip gone.   Till drip again and on.  a Again on.  b Somehow on. Somehow drip on.D Ooze back to worsen blanks.   Those then when nohow on.   To unsay then all gone. All not gone.   Only nohow on.   All not gone and nohow on.   All there as nowwhen somehow on.   The dim.   The void.   The shades not gone.   Only wordsgone.   Ooze gone.   Till ooze again and on.  a Somehow on.   Somehow ooze on.E Ooze back try worsen blanks.   Those then when nohow on.   Unsay then all gone. All not gone.   Only nohow on.   All not gone and nohow on.   All there as nowwhen somehow on.   The dim.   The void.   The shades.   Only words gone. Ooze gone.   Till ooze again and on.   Somehow ooze on.VOLUME Bi[Cancelled by means of diagonal lines.]Stare preying still since last worsesaid on soft of mind.,[-]Say better worse not the samewhen [no?] words as when none.When nohow as when somehow.aSay [but?] [seen not trs to:] not seenthe same.Seen the same.aNo.Not <seen> the same.aSeen Neither the same nor seen thesame.bSeen - | [f. ]Bii [Place and date of composition enteredas Paris,  January .]Preying still on [xxxxx] mind sincelast worse said the stare.Something still not wrong there.BiiiPreying still on mind <as said>since last worst [sic] said the stare.<On mind [xx xxxxxxx].>[x] Something still not wrongthere.Say better worse another <stare>when with words than when not.When somehow than <when>nohow.,Neither same By the same otherstare seen other.When with words [then?] thanwhen not.CPreying still on mind as said sincelast worse said the stare.Something <still> not quite wrongthere.Say then <Try then> better worseanother stare when with wordsthan when not.D[In margin:  and S]<Far far from quite.>aHowEPreying since last worse the shadesstare.WORSTWARD HOB[iii] Preying still on mind as said since last worst said the stare.   Something still not wrongthere.   [-]   Say better worse another stare when with words than when not.   Whensomehow than when nohow.   While seen the same.  a By the same stare.  b No.   Notseen the same.   [-]   By the same other stare seen other.   When with words thanwhen not.   When as now somehow than when nohow.   How say how other seen?a How -.C Preying still on mind since last worse said the stare.   Something still not wrong there. [-]   Try then better worse another stare when with words than when not.   Whensomehow than when nohow.   While seen the same.  a By the same stare seen thesame.   No. Not seen the same.   Seen other.   By the same other stare seen other. When with words than when not.   When somehow than when nohow.   Howsay how other seen?  a How -D Preying still since last worse said the stare.   Something still not quite wrong there. Far far from quite.   Better worse another stare when with words than when not. When somehow than when nohow.   While all seen the same.   No. Not all seenthe same.   Seen other.   By the same other stare seen other.   When with wordsthan when not.   When somehow than when nohow.   How say how other seen?E Preying since last worse the stare.   Something there still far so far from wrong.   Sofar far far from wrong.   Try better worse another stare when with words than whennot.   When somehow than when nohow.   While all seen the same.   No not all seenthe same.   Seen other.   By the same other stare seen other.   When with words thanwhen not.   When somehow than when nohow.   How fail say how other seen?VOLUME B[The sequence B–Ba–B occurs twice inthe MS, both times in the same order,without the ﬁrst occurrence being cancelled.The second occurrence occupies about two-ﬁfths of a separate sheet, which has notes anddiagrams unconnected with Worstward Hoon the verso (they are reproduced in Appendix). Only the text of the second sequence isprinted in the surface text. It is presented outof sequence, to allow the ﬁnal text to standbeside the ﬁrst draft of each paragraph.]BiHow [xxxxxxx] <but> less?Less seen.Less seeing.Less seen and seeing <when> withwords than when not.[-]Stare by words veiled.[Xxxxx] Shades veiled.aAll three shades veiled.[-][-]All there as when no words.As when nohow.aBowed back alone.bOld man & child.cUnwavering unlidden [sic] stare.All veiled.aTill drip drip words again.bSomehow again.cTill no words.Till blank.No words again.Nohow again.Then shades unveiled.Stare unveiled.That words had veiled.WORSTWARD HOB[ii] Less.   Less seen.   Less seeing.   Less seen & seeing when with words than when not. >C Less.   Less seen.   Less seeing.   Less seen and seeing when with words than whennot. >D Less.   Less seen.   Less seeing.   Less seen and seeing when with words than whennot. >E Less.   Less seen.   Less seeing.   Less seen and seeing when with words than whennot. >VOLUME BBii [On f. r.]bOld m. & c. [I.e., man and child.]Ba[See note to B above.]Bai [Paragraph cancelled by means ofdiagonal lines.]Mind is remains.aRemains of mind.bWherever mind <said> said re-mains<.>co<O>f mind.dFrom now <then> mind alone.eNo more now mind now remains.[Of?] mind.fFrom now short mind alone.gShort for remains.hRemains of mind.BaiiMind is remains of mind.aWherever mind said said remains ofmind.bFrom now then mind alone.cNo more now mind and nowremains of mind.dFrom now short mind alone.eShort for remains of mind.Baiii [On f. r.]D[In margin:  and S]Stare by words veiled <dimmed>.Shades veiled <dimmed>.<Void dimmed.Dim dimmed.>aBowed woman’s back.bOld man and child.cForeskull and unlidded stare.{unlidded stare » stare}Only all veiled <dimmed>.Then all unveiled<dimmed>.Stare unveiled<dimmed>.That words had veiled <dimmed>.Da[In margin: ; paragraph cancelled by meansof diagonal lines.]aMind is remains of mind.bWhenever mind said said remainsof mind.cSo from now mind alone.dNo more now mind and nowremains of mind.eFrom now mind alone.fMind for remains of mind.CaWherever mind said said remains ofmind.From now short mind alone.Short for remains of mind.WORSTWARD HOB[ii]>  [-]   Stare by words veiled.   Shades veiled.   [-]   [-]   All there as [when?] no words. As when nohow.  a Bowed back alone.  b Old m. & c.  c Unlidded stare.   Only all veiled. Till blank again.   No words again.   Nohow again.   Then all unveiled.   Stare unveiled. That words had veiled.Ba[iii] Mind remains of.  a Mind said said remains.  b From now mind alone.  c No more now mind& now remains.  d From now mind alone.  e For remains.C>  [-]   Stare by words veiled.   Shades veiled.   [-]   [-]   All there as when nowords.   As when nohow.  a Bowed woman’s back alone.  b Old man and child.c Unlidded stare.   Only all veiled.   Till blank again.   No words again.   Nohowagain.   Then all unveiled.   Stare unveiled.   That words had veiled.Ca Mind is remains of mind.   Mind said said remains of mind.   From now then mindalone.   No more now mind and now remains of mind.   From now mind alone. For remains of mind.D>  When somehow than when nohow.   Stare by words dimmed.   Shades dimmed. Void dimmed.   Dim dimmed.   All there as when no words.   As when nohow. Only all dimmed.   Till blank again.   No words again.   Nohow again.   Thenall undimmed.   Stare undimmed.   That words had dimmed.E>  When somehow than when nohow.   Stare by words dimmed.   Shades dimmed. Void dimmed.   Dim dimmed.   All there as when no words.   As when nohow. Only all dimmed.   Till blank again.   No words again.   Nohow again.   Thenall undimmed.   Stare undimmed.   That words had dimmed.VOLUME BiBack for want of worse to unsayshades can go.Go & come again.No.Shades cannot go.Much less come again.Nor bowed woman’s back alone.Nor old man & child.Nor stare least of all.Blur yes.Shades as last worse said can blur.When stare most glued to one.Or somehow words again.Go no.Much less come again.Go no.Till dim go.If dim ever go.Never to come again. | [f. ]Bii [The paragraph (the last on the page,ending at about two-ﬁfths down the page)concludes with a dash, centred underneath thetext.]Back to unsay shades [can go?] cango.aShades cannot go <No.>Shades [xxxx] can blur.When stare most glued to onealone.Till dim go. If dim ever go.Never to come again. | [f. ]C[The paragraph is separated from the next bya row of dashes.]Till dim go. If dim ever go.Never to come again.D[In margin:  and S//]When stare glued to <on> one<alone>.Till dim go. I<i>f ever go.a<If ever never.> | [f. ; last .cm ofsheet left blank.]WORSTWARD HOB[ii] Back to unsay shades can go.   Go & come again.   No.   Shades cannot go.   Much lesscome again.   Nor bowed w’s back alone.   Nor o. m. & ch.   Nor stare least of all.   Blur yes. Shades can blur.   When stare glued to one alone.   Or somehow words again.   Go no norcome again.   Till dim go. If ever go.   Never to come again.C Back for want of worse to unsay shades can go.   Go and come again.   No. Shades cannot go.   Much less come again.   Nor bowed woman’s back alone. Nor old man and child.   Nor stare least of all.   Blur yes.   Shades as last worseseen can blur.   When stare most glued to one.   Or somehow words again.   Gono nor come again.   Till dim go. If ever.   Never to come again.D Back to unsay shades can go.   Go and come again.  No.   Shades cannot go. Much less come again.   Nor bowed woman’s back.   Nor old man and child.   Norforeskull and stare.   Blur yes.   Shades can blur.   When stare on one alone.   Orsomehow words again.   Go no nor come again.   Till dim if ever go.   Never tocome again.  a If ever never.E Back unsay shades can go.   Go and come again.   No.   Shades cannot go.   Muchless come again.   Nor bowed old woman’s back.   Nor old man and child.   Norforeskull and stare.   Blur yes.   Shades can blur.   When stare clamped to one alone. Or somehow words again.   Go no nor come again.   Till dim if ever go.   Neverto come again.VOLUME B[At the left-hand top of the page are threeshort lines of notes, the ﬁrst two in French;the language of the third cannot beascertained: [Xxxxxxxxxx xx xxxxxx] /Bras vacants. /[Xxx “xx xxxxxxx”] Theyare followed by the inscription of the place anddate of composition, aligned right, are enteredas Paris,  March  (corrected from March).]Blanks <for> when drip [dims?]<words gone>.[Nohow back?] Then sight aloneall <only> seen as only then.All undimmed that [drip dims?]words dim.No trace on soft of mind when[drip again?]  from it drip again.Words for seen alone [xxxx] as seenwith words.When [xxx] words gone.D[In margin: ]aUnwarped that words warp.Words [for seen alone trs to:] alonefor seen as seen with words.As dimmed. Dimmed.aWarped.aUnwarped.<No words> When words gone.CaUnwarped that words warp.No trace on soft when from it drip<ooze> again.As dimmed by words. <Aswarped.>,No words for seen undimmed<.><Unwarped. For then>w<W>hen {undimmed when »undimmed. When » undimmed.Unwarped. For then when} nohowon.WORSTWARD HOB Blanks for when words gone.   When nohow on.   Then all only seen as only then. Undimmed.   All undimmed that words dim.   So seen unsaid.   No saying. Nowords then.   No trace on soft when from it drip again.   [-]   Words for seen aloneas seen with words.   As dimmed by words.  , No words for seen undimmed whennohow on.   When words gone.C Blanks for when words gone.   When nohow on.   Then all only seen as only then. Undimmed.   All undimmed that words dim.  a Unwarped that words warp.   All soseen unsaid.   No words then.   No trace on soft when from it ooze again.   [-] Words for seen alone as seen with words.   As dimmed. As warped.   No wordsfor seen undimmed. Unwarped.   For then when nohow on.   When words gone.D Blanks for when words gone.   When nohow on.   Then all only seen as only then. Undimmed.   All undimmed that words dim.   All so seen unsaid.   No words then. No trace on soft when from it ooze again.   [-]   Words alone for seen as seen withwords.   Dimmed.   No words for seen undimmed.   For then when nohow on. No words when words gone.E Blanks for when words gone.   When nohow on.   Then all seen as only then. Undimmed.   All undimmed that words dim.   All so seen unsaid.   No ooze then. No trace on soft when from it ooze again.   In it ooze again.   Ooze alone for seenas seen with ooze.   Dimmed.   No ooze for seen undimmed.   For when nohowon.   No ooze for when ooze gone.VOLUME BBack worsen twain preying <ever>since last worse said.aSince sundered <said> asunder.{[Since sundered. » Since saidasunder.?]}b[xx xxxxx] think?Since said apart <atwain>.For want of worse [xxxx] theyonce so cleaved then cloven.aThat little gain in worse.bPending worse still.CTwo once so cleaved then cloven<one>.Wider and wider now the r<R>ifttill <from now> a vast. A vast ofvoid between vast between. [theinadvertently left uncancelled.]D[In margin: ]WORSTWARD HOB Back worsen twain preying ever since last worse.   Since said atwain.   For want ofworse they once so cleaved then cloven.   Wider & wider now the rift till a vastbetween.   A vast of void between.   With equal plod a vast of void apart stillunreceding on.   That little gain in worse.   Till words for worser still.   Worse wordsfor worser still.C Back worsen twain preying ever since last worse.   Since said atwain.   Two once soone.   Rift from now a vast.   A vast of void between.   With equal plod stillunreceding on.   That little better worse.   Till words for worser still.   Worse wordsfor worser still.D Back worsen twain preying ever since last worse.   Since atwain.   Two once so asone.   Rift from now a vast.   Vast of void between.   With equal plod stillunreceding on.   That little better worse.   Till words for worser still.   Worse wordsfor worser still.E Back try worsen twain preying since last worse.   Since atwain.   Two once so one. From now rift a vast.   Vast of void atween.   With equal plod still unreceding on. That little better worse.   Till words for worser still.   Worse words for worser still.VOLUME BEvery <Each> somehow after<[away?]> nohow words againwhat when not preying?Each <[xxx]> better worse in vain.The void.All [xxxx] always faintly preying.[Worse?] <No [worse?]> less thanwhen but bad all [xxxxx xxxxxx]<still> preying.Ba [Paragraph cancelled by means ofdiagonal lines.]All but void.aNo.bVoid too.cUnworsenable void.dPreying too.ePreying praying.fOn mind.gShort for remains of.hLessening [x] Worsening remainsof.iTo mind.jNot [xxxx] for worse.kMuch less for worst.CWhen nohow over words againwhat then and when not preying?,<Worse for naught. Worser fornaught. <Worse for naught. Worserfor naught.>>D[In margin: ]<The void.>WORSTWARD HOB But what not preying?   When not preying?   Each somehow after nohow wordsagain what when not preying?   [xxx] better worse in vain.   No stilling preying. The shades.   The dim.   All always faintly preying.   Worsen in vain.  a Again invain.   [-]   No less than when but bad all still preying.   Nagging.C But what not preying?   When not preying?   When nohow over words again whatthen when not preying?   Each better worse for naught.   No stilling preying.   Theshades.   The dim.   [-]   All always faintly preying.  Worse for naught.   Worserfor naught.   No less than when but bad all always preying.   Nagging.D But what not preying?   When not preying?   When nohow over words again whatthen when not preying?   Each better worse for naught.   No stilling preying.   Theshades.   The dim.   The void.   All always faintly preying.   Worse for naught. Worser for naught.   No less than when but bad all always faintly preying. Nagging.E Preying but what not preying?   When not preying?   Nohow over words again saywhat then when not preying.   Each better worse for naught.   No stilling preying. The shades.   The dim.   The void.   All always faintly preying.   Worse fornaught.   Worser for naught.   No less than when but bad all always faintly preying. Gnawing.VOLUME CLess for naught <no good>.Worse for naught <no good>.Only one not for naught <good>.<Gone for good.>D[In margin: ]WORSTWARD HOB Nagging to be gone.   Less no good.   Worse no good.   Only one good.   Gone. [-]   Till then nag on.   All nag on.   To be gone.C Nagging to be gone.   Less no good.   Worse no good.   Only one good.   Gone. Gone for good.   Till then nag on.   All nag on.   To be gone.D Nagging to be gone.   Less no good.   Worse no good.   Only one good.   Gone. Gone for good.   Till then nag on.   All nag on.   To be gone.E Gnawing to be gone.   Less no good.   Worse no good.   Only one good.   Gone. Gone for good.   Till then gnaw on.   All gnaw on.   To be gone.VOLUME BNever worse. Ever since ﬁrst saidnever unsaid nagging to be gone.Never since ﬁrst said never unsaidnever not nagging to be gone.ENever since ﬁrst said never unsaidnever worse said never not gnaw-ing to be [xxxxxx]  gone. | [f. ]D[In margin: ]WORSTWARD HOB All but void.   Unworsenable void.   No.   Void too.   Never less.   Never more. Never worse. Never since ﬁrst said never unsaid never not nagging to be gone.C All but void.   Unworsenable void.    No.   Void too.   Never less.   Never more. Never worse. Never since ﬁrst said never unsaid never not nagging to be gone.D All but void.   Unworsenable void.   No.   Void too.   Never less.   Never more. Never worse. Never since ﬁrst said never unsaid never not nagging to be gone.E All save void.   No.   Void too.   Unworsenable void.   Never less.   Never more. Never since ﬁrst said never unsaid never worse said never not gnawing to be gone.VOLUME BAlmost gone All but gone.aLess Less & less till all but gone.aNothing left in void but [xxxx]skull and stare.bVoid then not that muchIf then not that much | [f. ] morethen that much less [that?] <then>?Enough of <A pox on> void.D[In margin: ]All but <As good as> gone.a<Not> That much worse?<All but <As good as> gone>Less the<n>? Less then?Evermost <almost> void.EIf then not that much more thenthat much less then? [John Calderprints If then not that much morethan that much less then? ; GrovePress prints If then not that muchmore then that much less then? ;the editorial choice is If then not thatmuch more then that much lessthen?]CVoid then not that much moreagain.<?>aThat much worse? <Worse again?>All shades <gone.> a<A>s good asgone.Enough of <A pox on> void.Evermost void. | [f. ]WORSTWARD HOB Say child gone.   All but gone.  a Less & less till all but gone.   [-]   From the stare. Void then not that much more?  a That much worse?   Say old man gone.   Oldwoman gone.   All but gone.  b Less & less till as good as gone.   Void then not thatmuch more again?   No.   Void most when almost void.   [-]   Less then? Shades as good as gone.   If then not that much more then that much less then? [-]   Enough.   A pox on void.   Evermost void.C Say child gone.   All but gone.   [-]   From the stare.   Void then not that muchmore?  a That much worse?   Say old man gone.   Old woman gone.   All but gone.a Less and less till as good as gone.   Void then not that much more again?  a Worseagain?   No.   Void most when almost.   [-]   Less then?   All shades gone. Asgood as gone.   If then not that much more then that much less then?   [-] Enough.   A pox on void.   Evermost void.D Say child gone.   As good as gone.   [-]   From the stare.   Void then not that muchmore?  a Not that much worse?   Say old man gone.   Old woman gone.   As goodas gone.   Void then not that much more again?  a Worse again?   No.   Void mostwhen almost.   [-]   Less then?   All shades as good as gone.   If then not thatmuch more than that much less then?   [-]   Enough.   A pox on void.   Evermostalmost void.E Say child gone.   As good as gone.   From the void.   From the stare.   Void thennot that much more?   Say old man gone.   Old woman gone.   As good as gone. Void then not that much more again?   No.   Void most when almost.   Worstwhen almost.   Less then?   All shades as good as gone.   If then not that muchmore then that much less then?   Less worse then?   Enough.   A pox on void. Unmoreable unlessable unworseable evermost almost void.VOLUME B[Notes on facing page (f. v), three lines(apparently unrelated to Worstward Ho):[Décrocher, accrocher?]. / noter, inscrire/ A écrit inscrit]Bi [Cancelled by means of diagonal lines.]Old man & child.Nagging <Preying> <ever> since<not <so> long since> [xxxxx]<last> worse said <ned>.Since a vast space between. Vastvoid between.BiiPreying ever since not long since[said?] last failed worse.CBack to once so-said twain or twoas one.All gone but trunks from now<then>.From necks <napes> up.D[In margin: ]Ever since vast <vast> void be-tween.WORSTWARD HOB[ii] Back to once so-said twain or two as one.   Preying ever since not long since lastfailed worse.   Ever since vast void between.   All gone but trunks from now. Nothing from pelves down.   Nothing from necks up.   Topless baseless hindtrunks. Legless plodding on.   Left right unreceding on.C Back to once two as one.   Preying ever since not long since last failed worse.   Eversince vast void between.   All gone but trunks from.  Nothing from pelves down. From napes up.   Topless baseless hindtrunks.   Legless plodding on.   Left rightunreceding on.D Back to once so-said two as one.   Preying ever since not long since last failed worse. Ever since vast void between.   All gone but trunks from now.   Nothing frompelves down.   From napes up.   Topless baseless hindtrunks.   Legless plodding on. Left right unreceding on.E Back to once so-said two as one.   Preying ever since not long since last failed worse. Ever since vast atween.   Say better worse now all gone save trunks from now. Nothing from pelves down.   From napes up.   Topless baseless hindtrunks.   Leglessplodding on.   Left right unreceding on.VOLUME B[Notes on facing page (f. v), two paragraphscancelled by means of diagonal lines: Theythen the words. Only they. // All onlythey. That ? of - That ? of joy ]Bi [Paragraph cancelled by means ofdiagonal lines.]Somehow again stare glued to stare.Bowed backs but blurs.aAll pupil.,[xx] Dim black holes.aThey only they then the words.BiiXxxxx xxxxx <[Be stare?]<s<S>tare [xxxx] worse said>glued> to stare.Away from b<B>owed backs<xxx> but blurs & <in stare>glue<d> to stare.Biia [Notes on facing page (f. v), twoparagraphs, cancelled: Seen for <be it seen>misseen. No more from now now seenand now misseen. From now seen alone.Seen for misseen. For be it misseen.Missaid misseen. Be it missaid be itmisseen. // That then still not wrong?]Biiai [Cancelled by means of diagonal lines.]As said <say> for be mis <it> saidso see for be it seen.a[xxx] Be it missaid.bMisseen.cFrom now not now one onedNo [more?]eNone now now one & now the other.fFrom now the one alone.gFor the other. [xxx]Biiaii [Cancelled by means of diagonallines in addition to line-by-line deletion.][Say again]aAgain [say?] as said for missaid seenso for misseen.bSeen for misseen.cNot now [one?] the one now theother.dThe one alone.eFor the other.fShort for the other.BiiiAt their place in [the?] face. Noface. At their place in unseen face.That the [xxx] ﬂaw?Try better worse in [the?]  skull.Two black holes in [the?]  foreskull.So better worse [x] stare from now.CiBowed backs but blurs in stareglued to <at> stare.Dim b<B>lack holes.<Dim black.>Holes i<I>nto skull.fThat mite of - mite of - joy. [Theword joy is encircled.]Cii [New paragraph.]<Dim black.>In through skull <un>to soft.At At their place in face. No face.At their place in unseen face.One black hole at mid of foreskull.So better worse the stare from now.D[In margin: ]Stare glued to <clamped on> stare.Bowed backs blurs in stare at <on>stare.In through <fore> skull to soft.One black hole mid of foreskull.Our [sic] from the hell of all.ESo better than nothing worse sayskull <stare> from now.WORSTWARD HOB[ii] Stare glued to stare.   Bowed backs but blurs in stare glued to stare.  a All pupil., Dim black holes.  a They only they then the words.   Holes into skull.   Out ofskull.  a The fore alone.  b No dome.  c Temple to temple alone.  d They then thewords.  e They only they.  f All only they.  g That smite - mite of joy.B[iii] Stare said for worse no worse.   Staring stared at stare.   [-]   Black holes.   [-]   Inthrough skull to soft.   Out from soft through skull.   At their place in face.   No face. At their place in unseen face.   That the ﬂaw?   The want of ﬂaw?   Try betterworse in skull.   Two black holes in foreskull.   Or one.   Try better worse one. One black hole at centre of foreskull.   Into the hell of all.   Out from the hell ofall.   So better worse stare from now.E Stare clamped to stare.   Bowed backs blurs in stare clamped to stare.   Two blackholes.   Dim black.   In through skull to soft.   Out from soft through skull.   Agapein unseen face.   That the ﬂaw?   The want of ﬂaw?   Try better worse set in skull. Two black holes in foreskull.   Or one.   Try better still worse one.   One dimblack hole mid-foreskull.   Into the hell of all.   Out from the hell of all.   So betterthan nothing worse say stare from now.D Stare clamped on stare.   Bowed backs blurs in stare on stare.   Two black holes. Dim black.   In through skull to soft.   Out from soft through skull.   At their placein unseen face.   That the ﬂaw?   The want of ﬂaw?   Try better worse in skull. Two black holes in foreskull.   Or one.   Try better still worse one.   One blackhole mid foreskull.  a Dim black.   Into the hell of all.   Our from the hell of all. So better worse stare from now.Ci Stare glued to stare.   Bowed backs blurs in stare at stare.  a No white. b All pupil. Black holes.   Dim black.  - They only they then the words.   Into skull.   Out ofskull.  a The fore alone.  b No dome.  c Temple to temple alone  d They only theythen the words.  e All only they.  f That mite of - mite of - joy.Cii Stare tried for worse no worse.  a Staring stared at stare.   Black holes.   Dim black. In through skull unto soft.   Out from soft through skull.   At their place in unseenface.   That the ﬂaw?   The want of ﬂaw?   Try better worse in skull.   Two blackholes in foreskull.   Or one.   Try better still worse one.   One black hole mid offoreskull.   Into the hell of all.   Out from the hell of all.   So better worse starefrom now.VOLUME B[Notes on facing page (f. v), threeparagraphs: S. outstared to old m //Trunk <in step> with child trunk vastsapart unreceding on // Vast <of void>apart old man & child dim shades onunseen knees. One blurred. One clear.Dim clear.]Stare outstared back <away><away> to old man. Still last worse[xxxxx xx] last worse said still[xxxxxx] <legless> {still [xxxxxx] »legless} in step with child leglesschild unreceding on. hindtruc<n>k<still> unreceding on.[Betters?] Better worse kneeling<Once> Legs gone better worsekneeling.<For>xxxever kneeling.Legs gone from stare | [f. r] saybetter worse from now foreverkneeling.Blurs as eyes <stare> to child andidem <same>. Worsen idem<same.>CStare outstared away to old <man>hindtrunk still unreceding on.Blur as stare away to child andsame. <Worsen same.>D[In margin: ]WORSTWARD HOB Stare outstared away to old hindtrunk still unreceding on.   Better worse kneeling. Once legs gone better worse kneeling.   No more on if ever on.   [-]   Say neveron.   Forever kneeling.   Legs gone from stare say better worse from now foreverkneeling.   Blur as stare to child and same. Worsen same.   Vast void apart old manand child dim shades on unseen knees.   One blurred.   One clear.   Dim clear. [-]   [-]C Stare outstared away to old man hindtrunk still unreceding on.   Better worsekneeling.   Legs gone better worse kneeling.   No more on if ever.   Say never.   [-] Say ever kneeling.   Legs gone from stare say better worse from now ever kneeling. Blur as stare away to child and same. Worsen same.   Vast void apart old man andchild dim shades on unseen knees.  , One blur one clear.   Dim clear.   [-]   [-]D Stare outstared away to old man hindtrunk.   Still unreceding on.   Better worsekneeling.   Legs gone better worse kneeling.   No more if ever on.   Say never.   [-] Say ever kneeling.   Legs gone from stare say better worse ever kneeling.   Stareaway to child and worsen same.   Vast void apart old man and child dim shades onunseen knees.   One blur.   One clear.   Dim clear.   [-]   [-]E Stare outstared away to old man hindtrunk unreceding on.   Try better worsekneeling.   Legs gone say better worse kneeling.   No more if ever on.   Say never. Say never on.   Ever kneeling.   Legs gone from stare say better worse ever kneeling. Stare away to child and worsen same.   Vast void apart old man and child dim shadeson unseen knees.   One blur.   One clear.   Dim clear.   Now the one.   Nowthe other.VOLUME B[Notes on facing page (f. v), cancelled bymeans of diagonal lines: Nothing to showan old m a child <&> yet a child. Anold man & yet a man. Nothing but the[same?] <how> nothing. The ooze &yet. How & yet. The bowed backs. Yeta old man’s. A small childs.]Nothing but [xxxxx xxxx xxxxxx]<worse oozing> ooze how nothingxxxxx and yet.A small <tiny> childs.D[In margin: ]WORSTWARD HOB Nothing to show a child & yet a child.   A man & yet a man.   [-]   Nothing butooze how nothing and yet.   The bowed backs yet an old man’s.   [-]   A smallchilds.C Nothing to show a child and yet a child.   A man and yet a man.   Old and yet old. Nothing but ooze how nothing and yet.   One bowed back yet an old man’s.   Theother yet a child’s.   A small child’s.D Nothing to show a child and yet a child.   A man and yet a man.   Old and yet old. Nothing but ooze how nothing and yet.   One bowed back yet an old man’s.   Theother yet a child’s.   A small child’s.E Nothing to show a child and yet a child.   A man and yet a man.   Old and yet old. Nothing but ooze how nothing and yet.   One bowed back yet an old man’s.   Theother yet a child’s.   A small child’s.VOLUME B[Notes on facing page (f. v), cancelled: Vastnarrow void // Staring eye glued to all.]The three bowed backs <down>.Staring eye <Black hole> glued toall.Intaking all. Engulﬁng <intaking>all. Intaking all.D[In margin: ]Somehow again and all [again instare trs to:] in stare again.Intaking<letting> all.<Outletting all.> | [f. ]CBlack hole glued <clamped> to all.WORSTWARD HOB How all again in stare.   All at once as once.   [-]   The three bowed down.   Thestare.   The vast narrow void.   No blurs.   All clear.   Dim clear.   Black hole gluedto all.   Intaking all.   [-]C Somehow again and all again in stare.   All as once at once.   [-]   The three boweddown.   The stare.   The vast narrow void.   No blurs.   All clear.   Dim clear. Black hole clamped to all.   Intaking all.   [-]D Somehow again and all in stare again.   All as once at once.   [-]   The three boweddown.   The stare.   The whole narrow void.   No blurs.   All clear.   Dim clear. Black hole clamped to all.   Inletting all.   Outletting all.E Somehow again and all in stare again.   All at once as once.   Better worse all.   Thethree bowed down.   The stare.   The whole narrow void.   No blurs.   All clear. Dim clear.   Black hole agape on all.   Inletting all.   Outletting all.VOLUME B[Notes on facing page (f. v): () encircledand cancelled: Loving memory. ()paragraph cancelled by means of diagonallines: As [xx] <loving> memory someold tomb <grave>stones [lean?]<stoop>. In that old church<grave>yard. Names eﬀaced [from?]<and> when to when. Xxxx xxxxxx.<Stoop> Mute over the graves of none.() cancelled by means of diagonal lines:Since long since last better worse ()uncancelled: [Plod / sod?] () uncancelled:Emptiness]Woman Long since woman longsince last better worse.a[Xx] [Hindtrunk alone stooped trsto:] stooped hindtrunk alone.aStoop mute over the graves ofNames gone and when to <till>when.CaStooped hindtrunk <back> alone.D[In margin: ]WORSTWARD HOB Long since woman long since last worse.   Nothing and yet a woman.   Old & yetold.  a Stooped hindtrunk alone.   [-]   Stooped as loving memory some old[gravestones?] stoop.   In that old graveyard.   Names gone and when till when. Stoop mute over the graves of none.C Long since old woman long since last worse.   Nothing and yet a woman.   Old andyet old.  a Stooped back alone.   On unseen knees.   Stooped as loving memory someold gravestones stoop.   In that old graveyard.   Names gone and when till when. Stoop mute over the graves of none.D Long since old woman long since last worse.   Nothing and yet a woman.   Old andyet old.  a Stooped back alone.   On unseen knees.   Stooped as loving memory someold gravestones stoop.   In that old graveyard.   Names gone and when till when. Stoop mute over the graves of none.E Nothing and yet a woman.   Old and yet old.   On unseen knees.   Stooped asloving memory some old gravestones stoop.   In that old graveyard.   Names goneand when to when.   Stoop mute over the graves of none.VOLUME BcBefore <Ere> too late to see. Tosay. for stare to see.dFor <?> ooze to say. [A caret besidethe question mark to indicate insertioncontemplated.]D[In margin: ]Ci[Cancelled by means of diagonal lines.]All three same degree. Of stoop.aSame highth [sic] of the eternalways.bSame breadth.cSame black.dDim black.Same vasts of void apart.Thus last degree <state>.Latest degree <state>.aOf worse.bOf better worse.cBefore too late for stare to see.dFor ooze to say.Cii [In margin.]WORSTWARD HOB All three same degree. Of stoop.  a Same [highth of?] the eternal ways.  b Samebreadth.  c Same black.  d Dim black.   Same vasts of void apart.   Thus last degree. Latest degree.  a Of worse.  b Of better worse.  c Before <Ere> too late for stare tosee.  d For ? ooze to say.   [-]   [-]   [-]   [-]C[ii] Same stoop for all.   Same vasts apart.   Such last state.   Latest state.   Till less invain.   Worse in vain.   Nagging to be naught.   Never to be naught.D Same stoop for all.   Same vasts apart.   Such last state.   Latest state.   Till less invain.   Worse in vain.   Nagging to be naught.   Never to be naught.E Same stoop for all.   Same vasts apart.   Such last state.   Latest state.   Till somehowless in vain.   Worse in vain.   All gnawing to be naught.   Never to be naught.VOLUME BSkull <best> worse.D[In margin: ]What left of <were> skull were it{left of skull were it » were skull}to go?Into what then black hole alone?<What why <& where> of all?>What little [supralinear stet] left ofskull.CWhat viewless source  <seat> ofall? <Source of all.>What <little> left of skull.Of s Into it still the black hole.From out what <little> left.WORSTWARD HOB What left of skull were it to go?   [-]   Into what then black hole alone?   From outwhat then?   What viewless source of all?   Better worse so?   No.   Skull best worse. What left of skull.   What left of soft.   Worst source of all of all.   So skull not go. What left of skull not go.   Into it the black hole.  a Dim black.   Into what left ofsoft.   From out what left.C What left of skull were it to go?   [-]   Into what then black hole alone?   From outwhat then?   What viewless seat of all? Source of all.   Better worse so?   No.   Skullbetter worse.   What little left of skull.   Of soft.   Worst source of all of all.   Soskull not go.   What left of skull not go.   Into it still the black hole.  a Dim black. Unto what left of soft.   From out what little left.D What were skull to go?   [-]   Into what then black hole?   From out what then? What why of all?   Better worse so?   No.   Skull better worse.   What little left ofskull.   Of soft.   Worst why of all of all.   So skull not go.   What left of skull notgo.   Into it still the hole.   Into what left of soft.   From out what little left.E What were skull to go?   As good as go.   Into what then black hole?   From outwhat then?   What why of all?   Better worse so?   No.   Skull better worse.   Whatleft of skull.   Of soft.   Worst why of all of all.   So skull not go.   What left ofskull not go.   Into it still the hole.   Into what left of soft.   From out what littleleft.VOLUME BOne tiny dot.<All vasts of void apart.>At [bounds?] bounds of boundlessvoid.Whence no afarther.Best worse no afarther.Nohow lessenable less.Nohow xxxx <end.>aOr said stare afar.bFrom afar.cWhence no farther.dNohow farther.D[In margin: ]<Enough.>Three needles <threads>.One pinhead <eyelet>.<In dimmost dim.>CSudden all <shades> afar.aAll shades.aAll four.Three tiny threads. <needles.>One tiny dot <One pinhead>.aDim black against dim white.All v<V>asts apart.Best worse no farther no farther.Nohow end <naught>.WORSTWARD HOB [-]   [-]   Sudden all afar.  a All shades.   No stir and all afar.  a All four.   [-] Three tiny threads.   One dot.   [-]  a Dim black against dim white.   All vasts ofvoid apart.   At bounds of boundless void.   Whence no farther.   Best worse nofarther.  a Nohow farther.   Nohow less.   Nohow worse.   Nohow end. Nohow on.C [-]   [-]   Sudden all afar.   No stir and all afar.   [-]   Three needles.  One pinhead. [-]   Vasts apart.   At bounds of boundless void.   Whence no farther.   Bestworse no farther.   Nohow less.   Nohow worse.   Nohow naught.   Nohow on.D Enough.   [-]   Sudden all far.   No move and all far.   [-]   Three threads.   Oneeyelet.   In dimmost dim.   Vasts apart.   At bounds of boundless void.   Whenceno farther.   Best worse no farther.   Nohow less.   Nohow worse.   Nohownaught.   Nohow on.E Enough.   Sudden enough.   Sudden all far.   No move and sudden all far.   Allleast.   Three pins.   One pinhole.   In dimmost dim.   Vasts apart.   At bounds ofboundless void.   Whence no farther.   Best worse no farther.   Nohow less. Nohow worse.   Nohow naught.   Nohow on.VOLUME B[Signature at bottom of MS, with a dash,centred underneath: Samuel Beckett]WORSTWARD HOB [-]C [-]D [-]E Said nohow on.VOLUME 1

290

APPENDIX 1

Appendix 1
“THE WAY”, “CEILING”, AND “SOTTISIER” RUL MS 2901

“The Way” and “Ceiling” are two brief prose pieces Beckett wrote immediately
before embarking on Worstward Ho in the summer of 1981. The “sottisier”, held
by the Samuel Beckett Archive in Reading University Library as ms 2901, con-
tains notes made in the period 1976–1982. It functioned both as a conventional
commonplace book and as a notebook for draft phrases and complete short po-
ems.  “The  Way”,  “Ceiling”  and  excerpts  from  the  sottisier  are  here  included
because in view of that closeness, both in time and theme, they may be regarded
as paralipomena. “Ceiling” especially is inextricably bound up with the genesis of
Worstward Ho (see the section on the genesis of Worstward Ho in the Introduction).
But the transliterations also show that some of the observations made about the
genesis of Worstward Ho have a wider validity, permitting an insight into Beckett’s
manner of composition. In particular, this concerns the repeated use Beckett ap-
pears to make in the composition of Worstward Ho of phrases which have an al-
most ﬁxed form from the moment he ﬁrst writes them down on the left-hand
pages of his manuscript, which he habitually uses for notes. Also, adding “Ceiling”
and “The Way” to the corpus of Beckett’s later prose serves to accentuate the
linguistic  and  thematic  web  that  it  forms.  The  vocabulary  of  “The  Way”  and
“Ceiling” is part of the same stock of phrases which connects the late prose, recur-
ring almost verbatim again and again, also in Worstward Ho. Similarly, stock scenes
and images keep returning. Take for example this fragment from Company:

A strand. Evening. Light dying. Soon none left to die. No. No such thing then
as no light. Died on to dawn and never died. You stand with your back to the
wash. No sound but its. Ever fainter as it slowly ebbs. Till it slowly ﬂows again.
You lean on a long staﬀ. Your hands rest on the knob and on them your head.
Were your eyes to open they would ﬁrst see far below in the last rays the skirt
of your greatcoat and the uppers of your boots emerging from the sand. Then
and it alone till it vanishes the shadow of the staﬀ on the sand. Vanishes from
your sight. Moonless starless night. Were your eyes to open dark would lighten.
(pp. 75–76)

291

VOLUME 1

Beckett’s late work has a strong web of shared themes and phrases. The following
fragment from the sottisier shares the (remembered?) setting on “A strand. Evening”:

That head. In those hands. His? No. Mine. Those eyes. On the sheet. His? No.
Mine. Long on that last white. Then closed. No. Through it wide.
So  the  dark  once.  Once.  And  no  more.  Once  more.  Such  light  then.  The
mother’s -. No. No human loved. One shadow alone. His? No. Mine. Mine
and no I. The old eyes. Through the white to that shadow. Small. Young. On
a strand. Evening. Cast on the water. Boy shadow on the water. A moment[.]
Flushed. Again. A moment. Flushed again. Night. Gone.1

An early draft of “The Way” has a similar darkness and sand, with its “Same gloom
at all times as though the earth at rest. Underfoot throughout loose sand” (B1.19–
21). The head resting on hands occurs prominently in, for example, Stirrings Still,
Worstward Ho, Ohio Impromptu. In Ill Seen Ill Said even the two-tier description of
the two-tier act of leaning the head on the hands is repeated:

Hand resting on hand on some convenient support. Such as the foot of her
bed. And on them her head. (p. 7)

And many further examples could be named, like “Light dying. Soon none left to
die. No. No such thing as no light” and “Starless moonless heaven” (A Piece of
Monologue, CSPlays, p. 267); “Were the eyes to look” (“The Way”); etc.

Both “The Way” and “Ceiling” go through a change of tense (“The Way”
through more than one), from present to past and vice versa. Beckett’s ﬁnal choice
in both cases is of the present tense. It means a choice for description rather than
narrative, and suggests a timeless quality.

“THE WAY”
“The Way” is held in the Carlton Lake Collection at the Harry Ransom Humani-
ties Research Center, the University of Texas at Austin.2 The manuscript is on
four (probably consecutive) leaves torn from a single spiral-bound notebook (in
all likelihood not the same as the one used for “Ceiling” or Worstward Ho, though
deﬁnitely by the same manufacturer). There are three typescripts, on A4 sized

292

APPENDIX 1

paper, numbered with light pencil in the top right-hand corner from 1 to 3, the
ﬁrst with watermark “Extra Strong” and the other two with watermark “Voiron
[outline of shamrock] Parcheminé Guérimand”. The ﬁrst two typescripts have the
text of the ﬁrst of the two paragraphs only. The last typescript, which has both
paragraphs, is a carbon copy, which has the bottom torn oﬀ, probably in order that
Beckett could insert it in his typewriter sideways, to use the typewriter’s “8” to
appear as the inﬁnity symbol or lemniscate. There is evidence that all three type-
scripts were at one stage stapled together in the top left-hand corner.

Beckett  wrote  the  brief  text  of  “The  Way”  (“provisional  title”,  as  Beckett
notes on the manuscript) in May 1981, some four months before he began work
on Worstward Ho. Though Beckett apparently prepared the text carefully for pub-
lication (the last two typescripts both show a minimum of correction), it was in
fact never published. Whatever the reason Beckett did not publish this text, remi-
niscent especially in the early drafts of the remembered walks in Company,3 it was
not that its theme was not important enough. The ﬁgure-of-eight shape of the up
and down movement described by “The Way”, as well as its symbolic signiﬁ-
cance, made an earlier appearance, though in a rather less serious context, in Dream
of Fair to Middling Women. When Belacqua vomits on the boots and trousers of the
Guard who apprehends him, stupeﬁed with drink, narrowly escaping being taken
to the police station,

It occurred to him, and he took great pleasure in working out this little ﬁgure,
that the locus of his fall from the vague grace of the drink must have intersected
with that of his climb to that grace at its most agreeable point. That was cer-
tainly what must have happened. Sometimes the line of the drink graph looped
back on itself like an eight, and if you had got what you were looking for on
the way up you got it again on the way down. The bumless eight of the drink
ﬁgure.  You  did  not  end  up  where  you  started,  but  coming  down  you  met
yourself going up. (p. 226)

Like Dream of Fair to Middling Women, “The Way” remained unpublished, but
Beckett  used  its  ﬁgure-of-eight  shape  for  the  television  ballet  Quad,  which  he
wrote at about the same time as “The Way”, in April 1981. The kinship between
“The Way” and Quad is strongly suggested by the way the titles of the two sec-

293

VOLUME 1

tions of The Way, “8” and “∞”, neatly combine into the pattern (in a stylized
form) described by the ﬁgures in Quad and referred to by its title.4

Through its various drafts the text moves from what could have been a rela-
tively direct representation of reality to almost complete abstraction. The walk up
and down a hill in the early drafts is reminiscent of the countless remembered
walks in Beckett’s work, in a landscape, however elementary, where sands may
hiss as they are scattered (f. 2r, facing C1). In its early drafts “The Way” is strikingly
close to the poem “je suis ce cours de sable qui glisse” from “Six poèmes 1947–
1949”, which Beckett translated into English for publication in Transition:

my way is in the sand ﬂowing
between the shingle and the dune
the summer rain rains on my life
on me my life harrying ﬂeeing
to its beginning to its end

my peace is there in the receding mist
when I may cease from treading these long shifting thresholds
and live the space of a door
that opens and shuts5

In the later versions “The Way” becomes increasingly impersonal, with the re-
moval of any reference to an actual act of walking (which might, for example,
cause the sands to hiss).6 What remains is a description of the path (“le cours”)
pure and simple, and the stern rules that govern its use. The vicissitudinous move-
ment up and down and to and fro on the way is like the pensum of life.7 That in
B1 Beckett changed the thistles that hemmed the way into thorns gives a further
clue that such a post-lapsarian world view encompassing all of humanity is indeed
what he intended. In its ﬁnal reading the text suggests the biblical “Therefore,
behold, I will hedge up thy way with thorns, and make a wall, that she shall not
ﬁnd her paths” (Hos. 2:6), but in its evolution, bringing together thorns and this-
tles, it also echoes “Thorns also and thistles shall it [the ground] bring forth to
thee” (Gen. 3:18). The development towards abstraction during the writing proc-
ess can be found in so many of Beckett’s later prose texts, notably Worstward Ho.8

294

APPENDIX 1

Between “8” and “∞” there seems to be a progressive diﬀerence. The walker in
the ﬁrst text is going up and down a hill with “loose sand underfoot”. The walker
in the second text describes the same ﬁgure of 8 pattern, but forth and back on
what appears to be a horizontal plane instead of up and down. The sand has given
way to “bedrock underfoot”. The route in the ﬁrst text is ﬁxed by the thorns that
hem the way, whereas in the second text the route is bounded by void. What
remnants of a sense of place there were in “8” have vanished altogether in “∞”: no
mist, no thorns.

The second text, “∞”, more closely approaches Worstward Ho, where the shades
are said to be in a boundless void (but where even that last indication of a material
setting, the bedrock underfoot, has gone). The walker still has to follow his end-
less path, but time can now no longer be told and the space beyond the path is
“groundless”. His situation is grimly and Dantesquely desperate. The extent of
grammatical ellipsis in The Way points forward to Worstward Ho. But while the
speaker of Worstward Ho is able to argue himself forward to a situation which at
least suggests that it approaches the end of the condition, the walker of The Way is
likely to continue his plodding eternally.

“CEILING”
“Ceiling” is a surprising omission from the Complete Short Prose, 1929–1989, edited
by S.E. Gontarski (New York, 1995). It was ﬁrst published in Arikha (Paris, 1985),
with the dedication  “For Avigdor”, and dated September 1981. The documen-
tary sources for “Ceiling” are, like those of “The Way”, held in the Carlton Lake
Collection at the Harry Ransom Humanities Research Center at Austin.9 They
consist of four leaves of manuscript and three leaves of typescript. The manuscript
leaves  measure  14.7  x  21cm;  they  are  numbered  1–5  by  Beckett,  torn  from  a
spiral-bound notebook, made by the same manufacturer and possibly the same
copy as the ﬁrst of the three notebooks from which Beckett used leaves for Worstward
Ho, but diﬀerent from the notebook used for “The Way”. The manuscript has
some aborted drafts followed by two consecutive full-length drafts. The ﬁrst com-
plete manuscript draft is dated Courmayeur, 10 July 1981; the second complete
manuscript draft is dated Paris, 26 July 1981. The three leaves of typescript, of A4
size, contain one version each, and are numbered by Beckett 1–3. They bear the
watermark “Voiron [outline of shamrock] Parcheminé Guérimand”, as do most

295

VOLUME 1

of typescript C and all of typescript D of Worstward Ho, and the last two typescripts
of “The Way”. The title “Ceiling” is inscribed in the top left-hand corner of the
ﬁrst sheet of manuscript, but is obviously a later addition. The typescripts are, as
usual with Beckett, undated. Though in the absence of any dates on the type-
scripts  there  is  no  external  evidence,  internal  evidence  suggests  that  “Ceiling”
does not conform to Beckett’s usual practice in the sense that he returns to manu-
script after he has made his ﬁrst typescript.

The ﬁnal complete manuscript is dated, at the foot of the last page, Paris, 26
July 1981, less than a fortnight before Beckett started work on Worstward Ho on 9
August, also in Paris. With only a fortnight to separate the last manuscript draft of
“Ceiling” from the ﬁrst draft of Worstward Ho (the typescripts may well date from
September, the date assigned by Beckett to “Ceiling” in the published text), the
two texts must have been closely related in Beckett’s mind.10 The very ﬁrst germ
for “Ceiling” might be a brief note, dated 9 April 1981, in “sottisier” rul ms 2901:

Ceiling
lid eye bid
byebye [p. 29]

The sequence of manuscripts and typescripts in the collection of the hrhrc ends
with a version which fully corresponds with the ﬁnal printed text in Arikha (Paris,
1985) in which it was ﬁrst published, with the dedication “For Avigdor”.11

The opening words of the manuscript are:

Two pages they said. No more. After the last page two pages. Two more. No
more. (f. 1r)

In a marginally diﬀerent form these phrases reappear twice more in the course of
the work’s genesis, but they fail to survive in the ﬁnal version. They would have
made the speaker into the ﬁgure of the scribe, familiar from so many other of
Beckett’s  works,  notably  Molloy,  but  also,  for  example,  text  V  of  the  Texts  for
Nothing.  It  is  tempting  to  surmise  a  connection  between  this  opening  and  the
occasion for which Beckett may have written “Ceiling”: the volume Arikha in
which it was ﬁrst published. The “they” might in that case refer to the actual

296

APPENDIX 1

person or persons who approached Beckett for a contribution. A similar direct
connection  between  the  occasion  (an  academic  conference  on  the  subject  of
Beckett’s own work) and the actual text exists in the case of the false starts Beckett
made for what was to become Ohio Impromptu. The speaker of the drafts for Ohio
Impromptu  is  like  a  denizen  of  Dante’s  Hell  who  is  sent  out  “on  leave”  to  be
present at Austin:12

Let me ﬁrst explain my presence in your midst.
The brutal truth is I am out on leave. Cast out on leave.
I was sitting quiet in my circle when they came for me and bid me begone.
Back with you to time, they said, for an indeﬁnite time.
Oh God, I said, not that.
Take the New World outlet, they said, proceed straight to Austin and show
them what you were made of.
Slip on this shroud, they said, lest you catch your death again.
Do not outstay your leave, they said, if you do not wish it to be extended.13

The ﬁrst time Beckett provides a title to any of the drafts of “Ceiling” it is “On
coming to”, the ﬁrst three words of the text. It has been crossed out in favour of
“Ceiling”.

Unlike Worstward Ho and “The Way”, “Ceiling” goes through a lengthy phase
of considerable trial and error while Beckett is searching for an appropriate struc-
ture.  On  the  ﬁrst  page  of  the  manuscript  of  “Ceiling”,  Beckett  has  added  the
remark: “Insert on or equivalent”—obviously an “editorial” note to remind him-
self of a device he wished to use in the composition. The ﬁnal text has ﬁve longer
paragraphs, punctuated by four paragraphs indeed consisting of the single word
“on”; in some manuscript drafts “on” is inserted between every two sentences. All
in all Beckett goes through almost four full pages of—cancelled—manuscript drafts
before allowing the text to stand in an uncancelled form, viz. the ﬁrst typescript
(which will be referred to as C).

The  tortuous  genesis  of  this  brief  text  has  led  to  a  profusion  of  attempts  at
beginnings, and a repeatedly foundering search for a structure to go “on” with. In
the case of Worstward Ho, Beckett abandoned a single ﬁrst draft to make a fresh
start, without, however, cancelling the abandoned draft. “Ceiling”, on the other

297

VOLUME 1

hand,  has  almost  four  pages  of  cancelled  drafts.  Pragmatic  arguments  were  ad-
duced in the case of Worstward Ho to treat the abandoned ﬁrst draft (manuscript A)
as a version, in spite of the fact that it constitutes no more than about a ﬁfth or a
quarter  of  the  total  text;  in  the  case  of  “Ceiling”  the  reverse  decision  may  be
defended on the basis of equally pragmatic arguments. The most obvious argu-
ment, of course, is that the “Ceiling” drafts are cancelled, while manuscript A of
Worstward Ho is not. In addition, Beckett’s casting around for a form prevents the
indication of straightforward correlations between individual paragraphs. Main-
taining the conventions of Worstward Ho and “The Way” would therefore require
a system of indicating correspondences of forbidding complexity. Reproducing
the ﬁrst four paragraphs would require a disproportionate number of left-hand
pages, leaving the right-hand pages virtually empty. This would defeat the de-
clared object of facilitating easy comparison and readability. The practice adopted
is therefore for the unformed initial draft material (none of which represents a
complete version of the text) to be presented serially ﬁrst before changing to a
parallel presentation for all full versions. This draft material is referred to as manu-
script A. No attempt is made to force it into what would amount to the straightjacket
of paragraph and sentence numbering.

The text revolves around a play on the word to, and more particularly on the
phrase “to come to”, which is used in the dual sense of to regain consciousness to
arrive in [a place] in a literal, spatial sense. The act of “coming to” takes place in a
vacuum, where there is “no knowledge of where gone from” or “whence come
to”. The “dread of being” involved in the process of coming to clearly points at
the theme encountered in so many of Beckett’s texts, and prominently in Worstward
Ho: that of life as a less than pleasant “pensum”. “Being” takes the familiar deﬁni-
tion of a place, a body and a way on: “Somewhere again. Somehow again. Some-
one again.”

“SOTTISIER” MS 2901
The “sottisier” held by the Samuel Beckett Archive in Reading University Li-
brary as ms 2901 contains notes made in the period 1976–1982, and most of the
poems  published  since  as  the  Mirlitonnades.  The  notebook  is  bound  in  brown
suede leather; it contains 174 pages of blank paper, measuring 8 x 11.4 cm. They
have been numbered by Beckett up to p. 19, starting after what appears like a

298

APPENDIX 1

titlepage stating “Rimailles / Rhymeries / Versicule(t)s” followed by the second
of the Mirlitonnades; and 32 pages (excluding the titlepage) contain writing.

The contents are varied: besides the Mirlitonnades poems also notes and com-
monplace-type quotations, probably reﬂecting Beckett’s reading at the time. The
material transliterated here is that which appeared especially relevant for Worstward
Ho, which may be found in pp. 25ﬀ. Though p. 25 has no date, the beginning may
be dated between November 1978 (the last previous date, on p. 23) and 28 De-
cember 1980, the date which appears on p. 27. What is particularly interesting, in
view of the discussion of Worstward Ho in Volume 2, is a series of quotations from
Schopenhauer and Shakespeare.14

Since the sottisier is not included here to study its genesis, the surface reading

only is presented. Editorial remarks are in italics, enclosed in square brackets.

299

VOLUME 1

NOTES TO APPENDIX 1

1 MS 2901, p. 27. The transliteration is of the surface text.
2 The manuscript is described in some detail by Carlton Lake in his description of the Center’s
Beckett collection, No Symbols Where None Intended, Austin, Texas, 1984, pp. 172–74. Anyone
wishing to make use of the Ransom Center’s manuscripts of “Ceiling” and “The Way” in any
form should contact the Center for permission to do so.
3  See especially paragraphs 10 and 39 (pp. 18–19 and 47–52).
4  Beckett drew the pattern in the manuscript of Worstward Ho on f. 18v. It is tempting to speculate
that the ﬁgure provides at least one clue to the signiﬁcance of the ﬁnal number of 96 paragraphs in
Worstward Ho (Beckett did not add the last paragraph until the very last typescript). Bearing in
mind that Company and Ill Seen Ill Said had 59 and 61 paragraphs (one digit short and one in excess,
respectively, of the 60 minutes that make up our unit of time), might not the 96 in some sense be
connected also with time (or its absence: eternity), for example in the shape of inﬁnity? Written
closely together, the circles of the 9 and 6 together resemble the inﬁnity symbol or lemniscate: 96.
5 CP, p. 59; cf also Company, pp. 75–76.
6 Curiously, the body that makes a brief appearance in the manuscript of “The Way” is exactly
complementary to those of the later part of Worstward Ho. “Nothing of body save head and feet”
(“The Way”, note on f. 2r, facing C1) joined with the “topless baseless hindtrunk” of Worstward Ho
(39.27) would make one full body exactly.
7  “Das Leben ist ein Pensum zum Abarbeiten: in diesem Sinne ist defunctus ein schöner Ausdruck.
(Schopenhauer: Vom Leiden der Welt.)”, from the “sottisier” notebook, rul ms 2901, p. 25.
8 See the section on the genesis of the text in the Introduction.
9 The manuscript is described in some detail in No Symbols Where None Intended, pp. 169–72.
10 At the foot of the ﬁnal “Ceiling” manuscript, apparently written at a later date, is the somewhat
surprising note “July 81 unpublished”.
11 In his catalogue of Beckett materials in the hrhrc, No Symbols Where None Intended, Carlton Lake
gives a lengthy description of all ms and ts versions of “Ceiling” (items 431–32, pp. 169–72).
12 This leads one to speculate whether the conference was originally to be held at Austin; or else
Beckett may have been confusing Ohio and Austin.
13 Reading University Library, ms 2930; the undated drafts date from late 1980 or early 1981—not
long before“The Way”; see Knowlson, Damned to Fame, pp. 664–65.
14 Otherwise of note from the part of the “Sottisier” not transliterated are a quotation from Pascal:
“Je ne tends qu’à connaître mon néant” (p. 24; All I strive for is to know my essence), which may
again be dated between November 1978 and December 1980, three references to Dante’s Divine
Comedy, and references to Voltaire and Heine. From Pope’s Essay on Man Beckett, obsessed with
man’s station, “so weak, so little, and so blind”, quotes the following four lines:

Who sees with equal eye, as God of all,
A hero perish, or a sparrow fall,
Atoms or systems into ruin hurled,
And now a bubble burst, and now a world.

300

THE WAY

APPENDIX 1

301

VOLUME 1

A1i [f. 2r; paragraph cancelled by means of
diagonal lines.]
1

The way winds up from foot to
peak. Thence on down another way.

2 On back down.
3

Half way up and down. The ways
cross half way up & down.

A1ii [Paragraph cancelled by means of
diagonal lines.]
1

The way wound up from foot to
peak <bottom to top> & thence
back <on> down another way.

2 On back down.
3

The ways cross halfway up &
down.
<The two ways were one way.>
The way up could not be used to
go back down nor the way down
to go back up.

B1 [Paragraph cancelled by means of crossed
diagonal lines. Note on facing page (f. 1v):
Stay was possible at - no. Stay was
forbidden. but but]
1

The way wound up from bottom
to top & thence on down another
way.

2 On back down.
3

The ways crossed half way up or
down.
The two ways were one way.
The way up could not be taken to
go back down nor the way down
to go back up.

5
6

5
6

C1 [Entire paragraph cancelled by means of
diagonal lines; note on facing page (f. 2v):
Nothing of body save head and feet.
[Dread?] <Anguish> & hiss of sand
disturbed (displaced) scattered sand.]

1

3

4

5

The way winds <up> <up winds>
- . <(>The way<)> wound up
from bottom <up wound the way
from foot> [Surface reading appears to
be: Up winds The - (The way) Up
wound the way from foot] to top
and thence <from there> down
another way.

2 On back down.
3

The winding <2> way<s> crossed
half way up. Half way down. <Half
way up & down.>
5
The two ways were one way.
6 No retracing the way up back

down [nor the way down back up
trs to:] back up nor the way down.

D1 [At end of paragraph, ranged right, the
place and date are inscribed as Ussy 14 May
1981.]
5 One-way ways. The two ways

were one-way.

E1 [Title, centred above: 8]
1

The way wound up from foot to
peak <top> and thence on down
another way.
The ways crossed half-way up and
down. Roughly <midway more &
less>.
<A little more & less than midway
up and down.>
The ways were one-way {one-way
» oneway}.

F1 [Title, centred, above: 8]

G1 [Title, centred, above: 8?]
3

The ways crossed [midway more
and less trs to:] more and less midway.

302

APPENDIX 1

D1
1 The way wound up from foot to peak and thence on down another way.  2 On back
down.  3 The ways crossed half-way up and down.  4 [-]  5 The two ways were one-
way.  6 No retracing the way up back down nor back up the way down. >

E1
1 The way wound up from foot to top and thence on down another way.  2 On back
down.  3 The ways crossed midway more & less.  4 A little more & less than midway up
and down.  5 The ways were oneway.  6 No retracing the way up back down nor back
up the way down. >

F1
1 The way wound up from foot to top and thence on down another way.  2 On back
down.  3 The ways crossed midway more and less.  4 A little more and less than midway
up and down.  5 The ways were one-way.  6 No retracing the way up back down nor
back up the way down. >

G1
1 The way wound up from foot to top and thence on down another way.  2 On back
down.  3 The ways crossed more and less midway.  4 A little more and less than midway
up and down.  5 The ways were one-way.  6 No retracing the way up back down nor
back up the way down. >

303

VOLUME 1

A1ii
7 Neither in whole from peak <top>
or foot <bottom> nor in part from
where they crossed <the crossing>.
Thence to return to either xxx
<extreme> the only way was to
proceed.

8

9 Rest was possible <could <if

xxxxxx> be had> <was to be had>
at foot or xxxx peak.

9a Also surprisingly at the crossing.
9b Elsewhere xxxx xxxxxxxxxx

xxxxxxx xxx to be had. no rest
could be had. xxxxxx xxx xx xxxxxx
xxxxxxxx xxxx xx was to be had.

9c To such rest no limit was set.
9d There was no compulsion when at
the peak ever to go back down nor
when at the foot ever to go back
up nor when at the crossing ever to
go [back?] on up or down.

B1
7 Neither in whole from top or

8

9

bottom nor in part from the crossing.
Thence to return to either extreme
the only way was to proceed
forward. [From here to 11a is cancelled
separately, but with marginal comment
“stet”, encircled.]
Stay was <A legend that stay once
that will at these points freed.
From ﬁgure of 8 unbroken inﬁnitely.

9a
9b A legend.
9c That ... that ...> [possible?] at

bottom or top.

9d Also surprisingly at the crossing[ly?]

. xxxxx xxxxxx xxxxxx.

9e Elsewhere not.
9f To such stay no limit was set.
9g There was no compulsion from

instant when at the top <ever> to

304

go back down nor when at the
bottom ever to go back up nor
when at the crossing to go on.

8

C1
7 Neither in whole from top or
bottom <foot> or in part from
crossing.
Thence <From here> to retreat to
either extreme the only way was on.
[From here to “the will set free.” cancelled
separately, with a bracket-type line in the
margin and an arrow pointing to the left-
hand page at material indicated similarly
with a square bracket: A time when
pause <once> {A time when pause »
pause once} possible at extremes of 8
before going on back up or down.
When <once> brieﬂy at these two
points the will brieﬂy set free.]
A legend that once stay possible at
top and bottom <foot>. most
wonderful of all and at crossing.

9

9a That elsewhere not.
9b That to such stay no limit set.
9c That no compulsion at the xx from
without when at the top to go back
down nor when at the bottom to go
back up nor when half way up or
down to go on up or down.

9

E1
7 Neither in whole from peak <top>
or foot nor in part from on the way.
Freedom once at foot and peak
<top> to pause <or not>.

D1
 [At end of paragraph, ranged right, the place
and date are inscribed as Ussy 14 May 1981.]
7 Neither in whole from peak or foot

nor in part from xx any point on
the <either> way.

APPENDIX 1

D1
> 7 Neither in whole from peak or foot nor in part from any point on either way.
8 The one way back was on.  9,10 Freedom once to pause or not at foot and peak before
on back up and down.  >

E1
> 7 Neither in whole from top or foot nor in part from on the way.  8 The one way
back was on and on was always back.  9 Freedom once at foot and top to pause or not.
10 Before on back up and down.  >

F1
> 7 Neither in whole from top or foot nor in part from on the way.  8 The one way
back was on and on was always back.  9 Freedom once at foot and top to pause or not.
10 Before on back up and down.  >

G1
> 7 Neither in whole from top or foot nor in part from on the way.  8 The one way
back was on and on was always back.  9 Freedom once at foot and top to pause or not.
10 Before on back up and down.  >

305

VOLUME 1

A1ii
11 The will at these three points was

freed.

11a On the other hand the journey

<ﬁgure 8> could be repeated
without interruption indeﬁnitely.
12 The gait was a constant plod both

up and down.

13 The xxxxx xxx xxxx xxxxx xxxxx
xxxxxxxx mile an hour. Existence
of a dry place high xxxxx xxxxxx
xxxxxxx.  <The rate one foot per
second.

14 Time taken to complete unbroken

course gave elevation.>
[-]

15
16 Eloquent of a dry place high cacti

<Giant thistles> hemmed the
way.

18 Thick mist at all times.
B1
11 The will at these points was freed.
11a Xxxxx as the ﬁgure 8 could be

repeated without interrupt unbro-
ken indeﬁnitely.

12 <In the same way> The gait a
constant plod both up & down.

13 Rate one foot per second.
14 Time taken to complete unbroken

course gave elevation.

16 Giant thistles <thorns> hemmed

the way.

18 Thick [f. 3r; from here to end of

paragraph cancelled by diagonal lines;
fragment of unconnected dialogue on
facing page (f. 2v):
A Remember // B No // A. No
memories? // B No // C None?]
mist at all times.

19,20Same faint light <gloom> at all
times as though the earth at rest.

C1
11 That at these points the will freed.
That that. A legend. From ﬁgure of
8 without stay inﬁnitely. A legend.
That from ﬁgure of eight without
stay without end at these three
points the will set free. A legend
12 Gait a constant plod. Both up and
down. <Down as up.> One mile
an hour.

13 Between Anything from 8 to 9

inches every <per> second.

14 Count the seconds from foot to

crossing. Multiply by xx <33 odd>.
Divide by pi. xxxxxx About so high
up. Deep down. Once heart to
count the seconds from xxx foot or
top to crossing. Xx multiply by 33
odd. By 3 most odd divide. Double
<To> quadruple. Double <Again>
Quadruple <xx> <To double> By 3
most odd divide. [Insertion point,
referring to: ? on facing page. Also on
facing page: Finally by pi divide.]

16 Giant t<T>horns hem the way.
18 Thick mist at all times.
19,20Same gloom at all times as though

the earth at rest.

E1
13 Pace a foot a second well over a

14

mile an hour <and more>.
So that from foot and peak <top>
to crossways could the seconds have
been numbered then height known
and depth.

F1
13 A foot a second or mile and [sic]

hour and more.

G1
13 A foot a second or mile and hour

and more.

306

APPENDIX 1

D1
> 11 Brieﬂy once at these extremes the will set free.  12 Gait down as up same plod.  13
Pace once & for all a foot a second or more than a mile an hour.  14 So that from foot
or peak to cross could the seconds have been numbered then height known and depth.
15 Could but those seconds have been numbered.  16 Thorns hemmed the way.  17 The
ways.  18 Same mist always.  19 Same half-light.  20 As if the earth at rest. >

E1
> 11 Brieﬂy once at the extremes the will set free.  12 Gait down as up same plod always.
13 Pace a foot a second a mile an hour and more.  14 So from foot and top to crossways
could the seconds have been numbered then height known and depth.  15 Could but
those seconds have been numbered.  16 Thorns hemmed the way.  17 The ways.  18 Same
mist always.  19 Same half-light.  20 As were the earth at rest. >

F1
> 11 Brieﬂy once at the extremes the will set free.  12 Gait down as up same plod always.
13 A foot a second or mile an hour and more.  14 So from foot and top to crossways
could the seconds have been numbered then height known and depth.  15 Could but
those seconds have been numbered.  16 Thorns hemmed the way.  17 The ways.  18 Same
mist always.  19 Same half-light.  20 As were the earth at rest. >

G1
> 11 Brieﬂy once at the extremes the will set free.  12 Gait down as up same plod always.
13 A foot a second or mile an hour and more.  14 So from foot and top to crossways
could the seconds have been numbered then height known and depth.  15 Could but
those seconds have been numbered.  16 Thorns hemmed the way.  17 The ways.  18 Same
mist always.  19 Same half-light.  20 As were the earth at rest. >

307

VOLUME 1

B1
21 Underfoot throughout loose sand.
22
So though no bones to be seen no
proof that none before.

23 None ever before so damned.

accursed.

C1
21 Underfoot [In left margin, without

insertion point: Half-light ]

E1
22

So that while no trace <sign> of
remains no proof <sign> that none
before.

23 No being <one> ever before so -

308

APPENDIX 1

D1
> 21 Loose sand underfoot.  22 So that while no remains to be seen no proof that none
before.  23 No being ever before so — .

E1
> 21 Loose sand underfoot.  22 So no sign of remains no sign that none before.  23 No
one ever before so —

F1
> 21 Loose sand underfoot.  22 So no sign of remains no sign that none before.  23 No
one ever before so —

G1
> 21 Loose sand underfoot.  22 So no sign of remains no sign that none before.  23 No
one ever before so —

309

that no sign of remains a> {No
shadow before » that no sign of
remains a} No creature ever before
so - So there being no trace of
remains the odds on none before.

15 No being ever before so -
D2iii [Beside this paragraph, encircled:
Gideon; underneath the paragraph, ranged
right, the place and date are inscribed as Ussy,
May 1981.]
1

Same to & fro <xx forth and back>
across a dirt ﬂat barren <waste
<barren>> <Same unending
[xxxxxx] way.>
Low in the west or east the sun
xxxx <stand> still.
<Long shadows before & after.>
Same freedom <leisure> once at
either end to pause <or not>.
<<At> Either groundless end.
[Way here & there no further?]>

2

4
7

8

11 Were the eye to look unending

waste <void>.

13 Underfoot be Bedrock underfoot.

F2 [Title, centred, above: ∞]

VOLUME 1

D2i [f. 4v; this paragraph together with the
next two cancelled by means of diagonal
lines.]
1 Or <xxxx> on a great shore <ﬂat>

wandering & crossing as before.
2,3 Sun ﬁxed on western verge as if

etc.
Long shadows before & behind.

4
4a Way ﬁxed by numberless feet.
4b Deviation perdition.
D2ii [Paragraph cancelled, together with
preceding and following paragraphs, by means
of diagonal lines; title, centred at top of
paragraph: ∞]
1 Or worse same winding way across

2

2
4
5
6

a plain. Great ﬂat.
Sun ﬁxed on western verge [xx] if
as before.
<Or eastern.>
Long shadows before & after.
Same pace & countless time.
Same brief deliverance at extremes
& ignorance of space between.
Deliverance once & ignorance
always. At extremes <ends> same
brief deliverance once. And igno-
rance always of how far between.
6a
Same unmeasured length between.
10 Through emptiness the ways & yet

as ﬁxed as if xxxxxxxx
<xxxxxxxx> <enclosed>.

11 To be seen were the eyes to look

12

unbroken waste.
In unending ending or beginning
light.

14

13 Underfoot beaten dirt Hard dirt
underfoot. Bedrock underfoot.
[New paragraph; cancelled, together
with previous two paragraphs, by means
of diagonal lines.] ?Sign that none
before. <No shadow before.> <xx

310

APPENDIX 1

A2
[-]

B2
[-]

C2
[-]

E2
[-]

G2
[-]

D2[iii]
1 Forth and back across a barren same unending [xxxxxx] way.  2 Low in the west or
east the sun stand still.  3 As if the earth at rest.  4 [-]  5 Same pace & countless time.  6
Same ignorance of how far.  7 Same leisure once at either end to pause or not.  8 [-]  9
Before back forth and back.  10 Through emptiness the beaten ways and yet as ﬁxed as
if enclosed.  11 Were the eye to look unending void.  12 In unending ending or
beginning light.  13 Bedrock underfoot.  14 So no sign of remains a sign that none
before.  15 No one ever before so -

F2
1 Forth and back across a barren same winding one-way way.  2 Low in the west or
east the sun standstill.  3 As if the earth at rest.  4 Long shadows before and after.  5
Same pace and countless time.  6 Same ignorance of how far.  7 Same leisure once at
either end to pause or not.  8 At either groundless end.  9 Before back forth or back.
10 Through emptiness the beaten ways as ﬁxed as if enclosed.  11 Were the eye to look
unending void.  12 In unending ending or beginning light.  13 Bedrock underfoot.  14
So no sign of remains a sign that none before.  15 No one ever before so -

311

VOLUME APPENDIX CEILINGVOLUME <hideous> marks the questions arise. To[wherever] where. From where. Tohimself.[xxxxx] conscious ofNo past. [Editorial remark by Beckett tothe right of this and the previous line:] Inserton or equivalent.On his coming to the ﬁrst sight<vision> was of white. Some time afterhis coming to the ﬁrst sight <vision>was of dim dull white.For some <unspeciﬁable?> time afterhis coming to or partly to his eyescontinued closed. When ﬁnally theyopened they were met by this dull white.Dimly conscious with closed eyes ofhis having come in a certain measure tohe chose to leave them so for the timebeing. Or they simply remained <con-tinued> so of themselves.Then when similarly of themselvesthey ﬁnally opened it was to be met bythis dull white.This dim consciousness of dimconsciousness it was and nothing elsethat led him to suspect <fear> hishaving come if not wholly partly to.Not till some unspeciable [sic] timelater when the eyes unbidden openedwas [the fear?] <the fear> conﬁrmed.Conﬁrmed by the sight of this dull white.Till then its only <sole> ground thisdim his being dimly conscious of con-sciousness in part if not wholly x recru-descent <reinﬂicted. [In margin, unclearstatus: [recrudese?] onslaught.] | [f. r][Paragraph on opposite page (v), cancelledby two diagonal lines; in the margin, encir-cled word count (): Dim consciousnessalone to wake the fear. Dim conscious-ness of dim consciousness alone. At ﬁrstalone. The fear of having come to.Partly to. The dim fear of having comepartly xxxxxxxxx to. Waked ﬁrst byconsciousness alone. Dim consciousnessA[f. r, with title “Ceiling” in capitals andunderlined at top left-hand corner; pagenumbered “” by Beckett in top right-handcorner. All of MS A except for the ﬁrstparagraph cancelled by means of diagonallines.][Uncancelled paragraph] Two pages theysaid. No more. After the last page twopages. Two more. No more.On coming to himself his ﬁrst sightwas of [white?].On <his> coming to [himself?]<himself> his ﬁrst <sight> was of white.Thus the germ. <Develop>Some time after <his> coming to<himself> his ﬁrst sight was of dim<dull> white.For some time after his coming to hiseyes remained closed. When ﬁnally theyopened they were met by <this> dim<dull> white.<Half> Conscious with closed<eyes> of his having come to hepreferred <chose> to leave <left> themclosed <so> for the time being. Or theysimply remained closed <so> withouthis caring one way or the other <ofthemselves>. For some time afterfollowing {after » following} his coming<to> they remained closed xxxxxxxxxxxxx without his having any sayin the matter <unbidden>. Then whenﬁnally they opened xx Then whensimilarly of themselves they <ﬁnally>opened it was to be met by this dull white.(Finish with “ pages. No more.”)Here so far four. One the coming to.Two the consciousness thereof. Threethe eyes. Four the white.One the coming to. Assured of noanswer the questions arise. To where.From and so without their gruesomeAPPENDIX of dim consciousness alone. Conﬁrmedwhen in the xx the eyes unbiddenopened. In the end unbidden opened.To this dull white. Unbidden in hisdespite.]Xxx In the dim ? [.....] of mind nomemory of whence gone. Now gone.Why no other way <choice> but go.No memory of whence gone nor ofhow nor of why nor of whom.Opened not merely of themselves butagainst his [wishes wish?] In none [xxxxxx] however feebly [xxx] not howeverfeebly xxxx xxx xxxxx xx xxx [Theparagraph ends with a short dash, centred.]xxTwo pages. No more. After the lastpage two more. No more.[On left-hand page, cancelled by twodiagonal lines: First <[xxxx]> [xxxxx xx]First sense of mind come partly toworsened by that of body too comepartly to when ﬁnally the eyes unbiddenopened to this dull white.On.Unbidden [xxxx] <no> but in answerto a call.On.A call from without.On.[Over?]heard [Un?]perceived by themind.On.By such of mind as had come to.On.Heard <Perceived> by the eyes alone.On.Heard <Perceived> by the eyes alonethe call of this dull white.The call of the dull white calling to beseen.X On.Which when answered]*On coming to his ﬁrst sight was of white.On.Some time after coming to his ﬁrstsight was of dull white.On.For some time after coming to his eyescontinued closed. When in the end theyopened they were met by this dull white.On.Conscious with closed eyes of havingcome to he left them so. Then when hebid them open they were met by thisdull white.On.Partly <Dimly> conscious with closedeyes of having come partly to he leftthem so. Or they continued so ofthemselves. On. Then when similarly ofthemselves they opened it was to be metby this dull white.On.Dim consciousness of dim conscious-ness alone <at ﬁrst> xx to wake the senseof having come in part xxxxxx partly to.On.The fear.On.Fear then <[timely?]> <then> con-ﬁrmed when the eyes unbidden opened[xx] when they eyes [xxxx] unbiddenopened by <to> this dull white.On.Not merely unbidden then but in hisdespite.On.No memory <knowledge> ofwhence gone <where gone from>.None of how. None of how <why>.On.None of whom.On.Xxxx <Same> for whence come to.On.Partly so.On. | [r]VOLUME B[Title, centred: On coming to <Ceiling>;note, to the right of title: grey for dull.passim with a question mark beside it.]B[On?]BiOn coming to his ﬁrst sight was ofwhite.That is to say that <Or rather>some time following his <after>coming to his ﬁrst sight was of dullwhite. <Dull white.>Bii [In addition to entire paragraph being cancelledby diagonal lines, from a to the end separately(and therefore probably earlier) deleted, also bydiagonal lines; the latter section being separatelymarked also by a marginal (vertical) line and a largecapital letter “A”, referring to a later version of thesame text at the top of the facing page (f. v). Onfacing page (f. v), cancelled by diagonal lines: In aword last word when partly conscious ofxxxxxxxxx himself partly conscious of beingpartly conscious or rather some time later andso fearful as he might of having come to inpart it was xxxx not till when some time laterwhen his eyes unbidden opened that his fearwas conﬁrmed [xxx] ? [..........] by the sightof this dull white. Nothing more is known.Or rather nothing more can be said. // On. // In a word he dimly <con–scious> and sofearful as he might of having come partly tohis fear was later conﬁrmed when the eyesforbidden opened to this dull white. By thisdull white. // No knowledge of where gonefrom. Nor of how. Nor of why. Nor ofwhom. None of whence come to. Partly to.<? Nor of how. Nor of why. Nor ofwhom.> No knowledge of any kind. Savedimly of having come to. Partly to. <With>Dim dread of being again. Partly again.Somewhere again. <Somehow again. Some–why again.> Some one again. Dread wakedalone at ﬁrst. By <by> con–sciousness<alone>. Dim consciousness. Of dimconsciousness. Then conﬁrmed. When theeyes forbidden opened. To this dim <dull>white. By this dim white. Further one cannotgo. // On. // Further one cannot go. // On.// Eyes then for–bidden opened. [Xx] Tothis dull white. Imagine on. Labour oon.<Dim> Dread conﬁrmed of partly to. <Bythis dull white.> Somehow partly to. Some–why partly to. Somewhere partly to. Someone partly to. More one cannot. // On. //More one cannot. // On. // More onecannot without .. // On. ]On coming to his ﬁrst sight was ofwhite.Or rather s<S>ome time after comingto his ﬁrst sight was of dull white.E[Typescript, numbered in top right-handcorner “”. Title “Ceiling” centred above.]F [Typescript, numbered in top right-handcorner “”. Title “Ceiling” centred above.]C [Typescript, intermediate between thecancelled manuscript draft version B and theﬁnal manuscript draft, D; leaf numbered  intop right-hand corner.]D[Deﬁnitive manuscript version, on f. r,following a horizontal line across the width ofthe page]D [In the margin, at about the middle ofthe paragraph, perhaps word counts:  and]APPENDIX C On coming to his ﬁrst sight was of white.  Some time after coming to his ﬁrst sightwas of dull white. >D On coming to the ﬁrst sight is of white.   Some time after coming to the ﬁrst sight isof dull white. >E ﬁrst sight is of dull white.   [-] >F On coming to the ﬁrst sight is of white.   Some time after coming to the ﬁrst sight isof dull white. >VOLUME BiFor some time after coming to hiseyes continued closed.<Then> When in the end theyopened they were met by this dullwhite.Conscious with closed eyes ofhaving come to he left them so.Then when in the end they<opened> what did they see butthis dull white.Or rather partly conscious withclosed eyes of having come <to>he left them so. Of having comepartly to.Then when in the end he bid themopen what of all things met theirgaze but this dull white.Or rather partly conscious withclosed eyes of having come partlyto they [xx] of themselves contin-ued <so>.partly to they of themselves contin-ued so.CWhen in the end they opened theywere met by this dim <dull> white.BiiThat is that for some time aftercoming to his eyes continued closed.Then w<W>hen in the end theyopened they were met by this dullwhite.Conscious with closed eyes of havingcome to he left them so.Then when in the end they openedthey were met by this dull white.Or rather partly conscious withclosed eyes of having come partly tohe left them so.Then when in the end they opened<he bid them open> they weremet by this dull white.Or rather <he> partly consciouswith closed eyes of having comeEFor some time after coming to theeyes continue closed <to>.Consciousness eyes closed <to> ofhaving come to.Dim consciousness eyes closed keptclosed <bidden to> of having comepartly to.Dim consciousness eyes closedunbidden closed <to> of havingcome partly to.DFor some time after coming to theeyes continued closed.Conscious with closed eyes ofhaving come to eyes kept closed.When in the end they open theyare met by this dull white. Con-sciousness with eyes closed<[eyes?]> kept closed of havingcome to.When in the end they opened theywere are met by this dull white.Dim consciousness with eyes closedkept closed of having come partlyto.When in the end bidden <[xxx]bidden they> open stay open theyare met by this dull white.Dim consciousness with eyes closedcontinuing <unbidden> closed ofhaving come partly to. Of themselvescontinuing closed.APPENDIX C> For some time after his coming to the eyes continued closed.   When in the endthey opened they were met by this dull white.   Conscious with closed eyes of havingcome to he left them so.   When in the end they opened they were met by this dullwhite.   Dimly conscious with closed eyes of having come partly to he left them so.  When in the end he bid them open they were met by this dull white.   He dimlyconscious with closed eyes of having come partly to they of themselves continued so. >D>  For some time after coming to the eyes continue closed.   When in the end theyopen they are met by this dull white.   Consciousness eyes closed kept closed of havingcome to.   When in the end they open they are met by this dull white.   Dim con-sciousness eyes closed kept closed of having come partly to.   When in the end biddenthey open they are met by this dull white.   Dim consciousness eyes closed unbiddenclosed of having come partly to. >E> For some time after coming to the eyes continue to.   When in the end they openthey are met by this dull white.   Consciousness eyes to of having come to.   When inthe end they open they are met by this dull white.   Dim consciousness eyes bidden toof having come partly to.   When in the end bidden they open they are met by thisdull white.   Dim consciousness eyes unbidden to of having come partly to. >F>  For some time after coming to the eyes continue to.   When in the end they openthey are met by this dull white.   Consciousness eyes to of having come to.   When inthe end they open they are met by this dull white.   Dim consciousness eyes bidden toof having come partly to.   When in the end bidden they open they are met by thisdull white.   Dim consciousness eyes unbidden to of having come partly to. >VOLUME BiThen when similarly of themselvesthey opened it was of all things tobe met by this dull white.aDim consciousness of dim con-sciousness xxx alone it was thatwoke the fear.bAlone at ﬁrst it was.cThe fear of having come in somemeasure to.dFear not to be conﬁrmed till laterwhen the eyes unbidden opened tothis dull white.eNot merely unbidden then <there-fore> but in his despite.[Biii] [Paragraph at the top of facing page(f. v) cancelled by means of diagonal lines,identiﬁed by a large capital A in the right-hand margin as the replacement of relevanttext on f. r. The section corresponds withCa. The numbering follows Bii: a Dimconsciousness alone to wake the fear. Atﬁrst alone. b Fear of having come in ameasure to.  c Conﬁrmed when theeyes unbidden opened. To this dullwhite.  d Unbidden in his despite.e In a word he dimly conscious and sofearful as he might of having come partlyto. Fearful with dim fear. Conﬁrmedwhen the eyes forbidden opened. To thisdull white.  f By this dull white.  Further one cannot.]DWhen in the end of themselves<unbidden> they open they aremet by this dull white. | [r]DaDim consciousness alone.aDim consciousness of dim conscious-ness alone.bAt ﬁrst alone.BiiThen when similarly of themselvesthey opened they were met by thisdull white.aDim consciousness alone at ﬁrst itwas that woke the fear.bThat of having come in some measure<to>.cNot to be conﬁrmed till later whenhis <the> eyes unbidden openingwere met by this <opened to> dullwhite.dNot merely unbidden then but in hisdespite.eIn a word last word he dimly con-scious and so fearful as he might ofhaving come partly to his fear waslater conﬁrmed when his eyesforbidden opened to this dull white.fBy this dull white.Beyond that <Further> one cannotgo.APPENDIX C>  When of themselves in the end they opened they were met by this dull white. Further one cannot. >D>  When in the end unbidden they open they are met by this dull white.   Furtherone cannot. >E>  When in the end unbidden they open they are met by this dull white.   Furtherone cannot. >F>  When in the end unbidden they open they are met by this dull white.   Furtherone cannot. >VOLUME BOn.BaBeyond that <Further> one cannotgo. {Beyond that » Further}BbOn.Bc[Two lines of text made illegible by heavypen erasure]CaConﬁrmed when the eyes <in theend> unbidden opened.Conﬁrmed when the eyes <in theend> forbidden opened.APPENDIX C On.Ca Dim consciousness alone to wake the fear.   At ﬁrst alone.   The fear of havingcome in a measure to.   Conﬁrmed when the eyes in the end unbidden opened.   Tothis dull white.   Unbidden in his despite.   In a word he dimly conscious and sofearful as he might.   Of having come partly to.   Fearful with dim fear.   Con-ﬁrmed when the eyes in the end forbidden opened.   To this dull white.   By thisdull white.   Further one cannot.Cb On.D [-]E On.F On.VOLUME white. // Further - // On. // A Patchof ceiling. Dulled by endless <Dull withendless> breath. Endless ending breath.Bidding open. Gently bidding For thatlast look. sight. Last best of sights.]Dim consciousness.aOf dim consciousness.Conﬁrmed when the eyes unbid-den opened.aForbidden opened.bFeebly forbidden opened.To this dull white.<By this d. w.>Further one cannot go.BaOn.BbFurther one cannot go. {cannot go.» cannot.}BNo knowledge of where gone from.Nor of how.aNor of why.Nor of whom.None of whence come to.[xx] Partly to.Nor of how.aNor of why.Nor of whom.None of any kind.Save dimly of having come to.Partly to.With dim dread of being again.Partly again.Somewhere again.Somehow again.aSome why again.Someone again.Dread | [f. r] born at ﬁrst ofconsciousness alone.[Notes, eight paragraphs, cancelled by meansof diagonal lines, on facing page (f. v): Dimconsciousness at ﬁrst alone. Of mindalone come partly to. Then <Till> atthe sight of this [dim xxxx] dull white ofbody too. Of body to come partly too[sic]. When the eyes forbidden opened.Partly opened. Feebly forbidden partlyopened to this dull white. Further onecannot. // On. // Forbidden yes butbidden to [sic]. By this dull white. Thenworse come the body to. Partly to.When the eyes unbid forbidden opened.Partly opened. Feebly forbidden partlyopened. Bidden by this dull white.Further one - // On. // Something thenof some mind come to. Of some bodycome to. Someh Somewhere to. Some-how to. Some why to. First conscious-ness alone. Dim consciousness. Of dimconsciousness. Then eyes xxxx unbiddenopened. Forbidden opened. Feeblyforbidden half <partly> opened.Bidden by this dull white. To this dullFNo knowledge <None> of anything.ENo knowledge of any kind <any-thing>.DConﬁrmed when in the end theeyes unbidden opened.C [In margin, extent of last four lines,vertical line and word count: ]aNor of why.aNor of why.aSomewhy again.a<Further one cannot.bOn.>Dim consciousness. Of dim con-sciousness <alone>.Conﬁrmed when the eyes <in theend> unbidden opened.F<f>orbidden opened.aFeebly forbidden opened.APPENDIX C No knowledge of where gone from.   Nor of how.   Nor of whom.   None ofwhence come to.   Partly to.   Nor of how.   Nor of whom.   None of any kind. Save dimly of having come to.   Partly to.   With dim dread of being again.  Partly again.   Somewhere again.   Somehow again.   Someone again.  aFurther one cannot.  b On.   Dim dread born ﬁrst of consciousness alone.   Dimconsciousness alone.   Conﬁrmed when the eyes in the end forbidden opened.  To this dull white.   By this dull white.   Further one cannot.D No knowledge of where gone from.   Nor of how.   Nor of whom.   None ofwhence come to.   Partly to.   Nor of how.   Nor of whom.   None of any kind. Save dimly of having come to.   Partly to.   With dread of being again.   Partlyagain.   Somewhere again.  [-]   Someone again.   Dim dread born ﬁrst ofconsciousness alone.   Dim consciousness alone.   Conﬁrmed when in the end theeyes unbidden open.   To this dull white.   By this dull white.   Further onecannot.E No knowledge of where gone from.   Nor of how.   Nor of whom.   None ofwhence come to.   Partly to.   Nor of how.   Nor of whom.   No knowledge ofanything.   Save dimly of having come to.   Partly to.   With dread of beingagain.   Partly again.   Somewhere again.   Somehow again.   Someone again. Dim dread born ﬁrst of consciousness alone.   Dim consciousness alone.  Conﬁrmed when in the end the eyes unbidden open.   To this dull white.   Bythis dull white.   Further one cannot.F No knowledge of where gone from.   Nor of how.   Nor of whom.   None ofwhence come to.   Partly to.   Nor of how.   Nor of whom.   None of anything. Save dimly of having come to.   Partly to.   With dread of being again.   Partlyagain.   Somewhere again.   Somehow again.   Someone again.   Dim dreadborn ﬁrst of consciousness alone.   Dim consciousness alone.   Conﬁrmed when inthe end the eyes unbidden open.   To this dull white.   By this dull white.  Further one cannot.VOLUME BOn.APPENDIX C On.D On.E On.F On.VOLUME C [In margin, word count: ]Then at the sight of this dull white<worse come> of body too.When [the eyes in the end unbid-den opened trs to:] in the endunbidden opened the eyes.F<f>orbidden opened.aFeebly forbidden opened.BDim consciousness ﬁrst alone.Of mind alone.[-]Come partly to.Then at the sight of this dull whiteof body too.[-],Too come partly to.When the eyes forbidden opened.aFeebly forbidden partly opened.To this [dim?] white.Further one cannot.DWhen in the end the eyes unbiddenopened.APPENDIX C Dim consciousness ﬁrst alone.   Of mind alone.  , Alone come partly to.   Thenworse come of body too.   [-]   Too come to.   Partly to.   When in the end theeyes forbidden opened.   To this dull white.  a By this dull white.   Further onecannot.D Dim consciousness ﬁrst alone.   Of mind alone.   Alone come to.   Partly to.  Then worst come of body too.   At the sight of this dull white of body to.   Toocome to.   Partly to.   When in the end the eyes unbidden open.  To this dullwhite.   Further one -E Dim consciousness ﬁrst alone.   Of mind alone.   Alone come to.   Partly to.  Then worse come of body too.   At the sight of this dull white of body too.   Toocome to.   Partly to.   When in the end the eyes unbidden open.   To this dullwhite.   Further one -F Dim consciousness ﬁrst alone.   Of mind alone.   Alone come to.   Partly to.  Then worse come of body too.   At the sight of this dull white of body too.   Toocome to.   Partly to.   When in the end the eyes unbidden open.   To this dullwhite.   Further one -VOLUME BOn.BaForbidden but <and> bidden too.aBy this dull white.bThen worse come body too.cToo partly to.dWhen the eyes forbidden opened.Feebly forbidden partly opened. eBidden by this dull white. Furtherone -BbOn.Ca [In margin, word count: ]APPENDIX C On.Ca Forbidden and bidden too.   By this dull white.   Then worse come body too.  Too partly to.   When the eyes in the end bidden opened.   Bidden by this dullwhite.   Further one -Cb On.D On.E On.F On.VOLUME BSomething of someone come to.aOf some mind.bSome body.Somewhere to.Somehow to.aSomewhy to.First consciousness alone. Dimconsciousness. Of dim conscious-ness.Then worse come body too.Something of some body too.When the eyes forbidden opened.aFeebly forbidden opened.bBidden by this dull white.To this dull white.Further -C [In margin, probably a word count: ]Something of someone come to.Some <Of some> mind. Somebody.aSomewhy to.First consciousness alone. Dimconsciousness. Of dim conscious-ness.Then worse come body too.Something of some body too.When the eyes in the end forbiddenopened. Feebly forbidden opened.<biddened opened.>DSomething of [one?] come to.When [xxxx] in the end the eyesunbidden.APPENDIX C Something of one come to.   Somewhere to.   Somehow to.   [-]   [-]   [-]   [-]   When the eyes in the end bidden opened.  a Bidden by this dull white.   To thisdull white.   Further -D Something of [one?] come to.   Somewhere to.   Somehow to.   First mind alone. Something of mind alone.   Then worse come body too.   Something of body too. When in the end the eyes unbidden.   To this dull white.   Further -E Something of one come to.   Somewhere to.   Somehow to.   First mind alone.  Something of mind alone.   Then worse come body too.   Something of body too. When in the end the eyes unbidden open.   To this dull white.   Further -F Something of one come to.   Somewhere to.   Somehow to.   First mind alone.  Something of mind alone.   Then worse come body too.   Something of body too. When in the end the eyes unbidden open.   To this dull white.   Further -VOLUME BOn.APPENDIX D On.C On.E On.F On.VOLUME BDull with <breath.>e<E}>ndless <Unending> breath.{Dull with endless breath. » Dullwith breath. Endless breath. » Dullwith breath. Unending breath.}Endless <Unending> endingbreath.a[xxxxx] xxx l<L>ast sight.Last <dread> darling sight.[Place and date inscribed at end of paragraph,ranged right: Courmayeur / ..]D[white?] dull with breath.Unending <Endless> breath.Unending Endless ending breath.First sight. Last sight. Dread darlingsight. [Place and date inscribed at end ofparagraph, lining right: Paris / ...On the next line, signed: SamuelBeckett. Below that, remark: July unpublished]APPENDIX C Dull with breath.   Unending breath.   Unending ending breath.  a Last sight.  Dread darling sight.D dull with breath.   Endless breath.   Endless ending breath.   Dread darling sight.E Dull with breath.   Endless breath.   Endless ending breath.   Dread darling sight.F Dull with breath.   Endless breath.   Endless ending breath.   Dread darling sight.VOLUME APPENDIX “SOTTISIER” RUL MS VOLUME [In three places “ND” or “New Directions”, followed by a date, has been inscribed beside the note.In the transliteration below, these are given in bold type, also beside the note. Page numbers areeditorially supplied (Beckett numbered pp. - only).][p. ]Das Leben ist ein Pensum zum Abarbeiten: in diesem Sinne ist defunctus ein schönerAusdruck (Schopenhauer: Vom Leiden der Welt.)Die Welt ist eben die Hölle, u. die Menschen sind einerseits die gequälten Seelen u.andererseits die Teufel darin.(Id.)Life penal colony(Id.)Nothing against suicide in O. or N. Testamentillico post coitum cachinnus auditur Diaboli[p. ]die Brahmanische Floskel “Wehe Wehe! der Lingam ist in der Yoni”Dass die Ende der Vogel der Athene ist, mag die nächtlichen Studien der Gelehrtenzum Anlass habenSch. “totgeschwiegen”das Warum die Mutter aller Wissenschaften (Vierfache Wurzel)Nichts ist ohne Grund worum es sei (Ib.)Wes Brod ich ess, des Lied ich sing (Welt: Vorrede)un petit cours desens communologieIb.APPENDIX [p. ; all text crossed out with diagonal lines]..That head. In those hands. His? No. Mine. Those eyes. On the sheet. His? No. Mine.Long on that last white. Then closed. No. Through it wide.So the dark once. Once. And no more. Once more. Such light then. The mother’s -.No. No human loved. One shadow alone. His? No. Mine. Mine and no I. The oldeyes. Through the white to that shadow. Small. Young. On a strand. Evening. Cast onthe water. Boy shadow on the water. A moment[.] Flushed. Again. A moment. Flushedagain. Night. Gone.[p. ]Die Welt ist meine Vorstellung ,,      ,,    ,,   mein WilleWhere is the life that late I led?(Petruchio: IV.)“unburdened crawl towards death”(Lear .)“The lamentable change is from the best,The worst returns to laughter - ”(Ib. iv: Edgar)“Who is’t can say, I am at the worst - ”(Ib.)“- The worst is notSo long as one can say, This is the worst”ThereN.D.the life late led..down thereall done unsaid..}Ib.VOLUME [p. ]Ceilinglid eye bidbyebye..vail bail tillbetter founder..away dream all away..My sorrow is my castle(Kierkegaard)Nulla dies sine Lacryma(K.)Nur wer die Sehnsucht kennt, weiss was ich leider [sic] (W.M. Mignon. Schubert.Wolf.)Ich grolle nicht, u. wenn das Herz auch bricht. (Heine. Schumann. Dichterliebe)[p. ]damned to fame (Dunciad)a fool to fame (ep. to Arbuthnot)The last & greatest art, the art to blot(Ib.)owl’s acute short sightdie-back: disease of orange trees in which tree dies from top downward (Swift)APPENDIX a touch of die-backhead on handsNDhold me..unclasp (untwine)hold meP. ..let ill alonelet illaloneStuttgart June [p. ]nothing blestoh sweetblest all(Ib.)ashes burning more than allthe burning allto ashesCourmayeur June Look in thine arse & writeP. aug. gone again allwith what to tellon again allretellP. ..VOLUME again goneNew Directionswherewith to tell..on againretelltittle-tattlemarl through rattle..[p. ]Mallarmé. . la clarté déserte de ma lampe sur le vide papier que sa blancheur défend. (BriseMarine)APPENDIX Appendix TYPOGRAPHICAL FORMTypography is an aspect of textual editing that does not receive a great deal ofattention. The interest of textual scholars in typography is generally limited to therepresentation of line and page breaks. In fact, some editors explicitly refer totypographical variation as being outside their concern. Perhaps in most cases thissuﬃces. If we acknowledge, however, that typography is the foremost structuringdevice in text, thus making an essential contribution to meaning, it might be wellworth considering how a text edition of Worstward Ho should account for thatrole. The typographical presentation of Worstward Ho in this edition is determinedby its aim of showing ﬁve versions of the text in parallel. Together with the use ofnumbers to enable cross-referencing between versions this means that the editionunfortunately cannot serve as a typographical example.Certainly in the course of its printing history Beckett’s oeuvre has suﬀered a fairshare of typographic problems of one kind or another. The confusion and obfus-cation arising from the printing history of neither (detailed below) is not perhapstypical, but is certainly instructive in that it shows so very clearly how typographicinformation is interpreted by the reader. Another example of ill-considered ty-pography in Beckett’s oeuvre is the case of How It Is. The Grove Press edition ofHow It Is, which Beckett was less directly involved in seeing through the pressthan the  edition by Calder & Boyars, has great trouble with its brief para-graphs. The edition has a number of awkward widows and orphans.Beckett’s interest in points of typography would certainly have extended to thepresentation of Worstward Ho. Worstward Ho is one of a number of shorter prosetexts the paragraphs of which, like those in How It Is, Beckett meant to havevisually separated by means of blank space: these include Lessness, neither, Com-pany and Ill Seen Ill Said. Beckett’s own usage in his manuscripts and typescriptsvaries. In the manuscript and typescripts of Worstward Ho Beckett leaves blanklines in addition to indenting to indicate fresh paragraphs. These spaces form anintegral part of the text. They are referred to by the narrator as “blanks”: “Blanksfor when words gone” (.). Though vision cannot be pressed into the service ofgoing on, it is allowed a place during the blanks. In fact, the narrator asserts, it isVOLUME precisely during the blanks—when there are no words—that everything can beseen more clearly (“undimmed”; .). In the case of Ill Seen Ill Said Beckettwrote (and later typed) every paragraph on a separate page. Company has a mixedbackground, but in the ﬁrst holograph manuscript Beckett uses blank space be-tween paragraphs throughout, frequently in addition to indents.The typographical representation of these texts deserves special consideration;here Beckett’s paragraphs are structurally of a higher order than conventional para-graphs. There is no shortage of typographic devices to indicate paragraphs. Thecommonest one is the combination of beginning a fresh line of type, indenting itby the width of about one or two ems, and using a capital letter. This is whollyunambiguous in all circumstances, and suﬃces for ordinary paragraphing. Moreemphatic paragraphing can be achieved by the use of a blank line to separate oneparagraph from the next. This device may replace the common paragraph repre-sentation just described, or it may be used in conjunction with it. In that case, theblank line indicates a division of a slightly higher order. It is customary not to usean indent following a blank line, which, however, makes the device potentiallyambiguous, since the blank space between paragraphs may coincide with a pagebreak and become invisible. A further method for paragraphing is the use of spe-cial characters, which again by convention denote a higher structural division.These include “dropping” the ﬁrst capital (or otherwise giving it a distinct form),or, employing non-textual devices, the paragraph sign (¶), with or without a blankline, and the row of asterisks (***) in an otherwise blank line. The range is limitedby convention (viz., the reader’s expectations), but may be extended by an inven-tive typographer. Such special characters, too, are unambiguous.Both the  and  printed editions of Company, Ill Seen Ill Said as well asWorstward Ho use a blank line in conjunction with an indent for the ﬁrst line ofeach new paragraph. However, in their “three-in-one” editions, the  and publishers’ typographic practice diﬀers. The  edition continues the earlier prac-tice of using a blank line in conjunction with an indent for the ﬁrst line of the newparagraph. The  edition of Nohow On has opted instead for a blank line withoutan indent. Whenever a paragraph break coincides with a page break, the editionadds, by way of a paragraph sign, a row of three asterisks in the blank space sepa-rating the paragraphs. The rule governing this use of asterisks is not, however,very obvious. Though it will be clear that the row of asterisks indicates a newAPPENDIX paragraph, it will not be clear that the asterisks replace the regular paragraph indi-cation by means of blank space. Readers may easily be led to suspect that theasterisks signify a break of a diﬀerent, or higher, order than the white space usedelsewhere. Not only does this make the paragraphing ambiguous, or at the veryleast confusing, the use of the asterisks is also typographically more intrusive thanthe use of an indent.Paragraphing; page and type page dimensions; type size; line length and hy-phenation; book size (its weight and thickness) are all typographic issues that aﬀectthe way the reader experiences and judges the text. All of these deserve carefulconsideration. The practical decisions the publisher makes in these regards areinevitably based on conventions: the expectations of readers based on centuries ofbook production. But in such spare texts as Beckett’s, the text’s own requirementshave to be borne ﬁrmly in mind. Worstward Ho’s paragraphs could of course berepresented by the use of an indent on a new line, which would be both unobtru-sive and unambiguous. But this would not do justice to the iconic meaning inWorstward Ho of the blank space beteen the paragraphs. Not every typographicaldecision necessarily carries so much weight. In paragraph  of Worstward Ho, DougaldMcMillan reads “mere-most” because the text is set hyphenated, and the line enddivides the word in the  edition. This breaks Beckett’s convention in WorstwardHo of the use of unconventional coinages that bring him closer to being able tospeak of things of which the conventional language of the phenomenal worlddoes not allow him to speak. (The documentary evidence shows that none of thecombinations with “-most” are hyphenated: almost, dimmost, utmost, leastmost,evermost.) Whether one wishes to attach meaning to this is dependent on aninterpretation of the text as a whole (which this book’s companion volume at-tempts to supply), at any rate a more critical examination of typographical choicesis needed for future publications of Beckett’s work.TYPOGRAPHY AND MEANING IN THE PRINTING HISTORY OF NEITHERBeckett wrote neither in September  as a libretto to be set to music by MortonFeldman. The opera received its ﬁrst performance in Rome in May . Thetext consists of ten brief paragraphs varying in length between two and eighteenwords. From the beginning, the status of neither as poetry, prose or drama hasmanaged to confuse editors, publishers and translators alike. The primary cause ofVOLUME the confusion lies in the brevity of the piece as a whole, and that of the individualparagraphs in particular, which prevents an unambiguous typographic conventionof line breaks and use of white space from communicating itself to the reader. Inone of Beckett’s typescripts, only half of the paragraphs extend beyond the linelength dictated by the width of the typing paper and the generous margins. Theresulting eﬀect could easily be mistaken for poetry, and was. The text was ﬁrstpublished in the JOBS ( [Spring ], p. vii.), where it was set as poetry, andwhere, to make matters worse, “the word ‘neared’ was accidentally omitted fromthe end of the fourth line of the text”. John Calder was about to include neitherin Collected Poems – when Beckett stopped him, saying it was not a poem.Whatever Beckett’s later practice in allowing numerous stage adaptations of hisprose works, he never abandoned the principled distinction between the literarygenres he formulated in a letter to his American publisher, Barney Rosset, inresponse to a request for a stage adaptation of his radio play All That Fall: “If wecan’t keep our genres more or less distinct, or extricate them from the confusionthat has them where they are, we might as well lay down and die.” After it was“inadvertently omitted from the Shorter Prose” the next publication of neither wasin As the Story Was Told ()—a publication which betrays the haste with whichit was put together after Beckett’s death through a number of unfortunate errors.The text of neither in As the Story Was Told prints two mistakes: “from inner tooutershadow” instead of “from inner to outer shadow”, and a question mark inthe place where the word “neared”, which had been dropped from the JOBSpublication, should have been.On the occasion of the International Beckett Festival and Symposium in TheHague, the Netherlands, in , the present editors published a small anthologyof Beckett’s work in Dutch translation, which also contained neither. Enclosed inthe letter from Calder Publications granting the necessary permissions was a freshlytyped text of neither, correcting the two printing errors from As the Story Was Told(as well as the errors in the date of composition and ﬁrst performance named inthe introduction to that book). However, the layout of this corrected text man-aged to reintroduce once again the notion that the text was poetry rather thanprose. Not only were the line lengths more irregular than would have been thecase if the text had been typed as prose (line breaks occurred before they wouldhave been imposed by the right margin), but in one paragraph a word was actuallyAPPENDIX marked as needing to be moved to the next line, reinforcing the appearance ofpoetic rather than prose lines. Obeying the explicit instruction in the letter ofpermission, wording and line breaks of the “corrected text” were followed ex-actly, not only in the Dutch translation published in the anthology, but equally inthe seven further translations produced in the translation workshop on neither heldduring the Symposium in The Hague. These were all subsequently published inan account of the workshop. Though verbally correct, all texts of neither, boththe English and the translated versions, in that account are typographically errone-ous in that they assume the line breaks of the “corrected” Calder text, and createthe impression of poetry. (The English text which heads the article in additionlacks a blank line between the ﬁrst and second paragraphs.) To date, not a singlepublished version of neither has printed the correct text; in spite of all care, evenS.E. Gontarski perpetuates an erroneous reading in The Complete Short Prose: thatof “outershadow” instead of “outer shadow” (p. ).Neither consists of ten prose sentences. The correct text follows here, on a freshpage to avoid any further confusions. It is based on the text as sent by Beckett toMorton Feldman with an accompanying note dated “Berlin 31 September [19]76”.VOLUME neitherto and fro in shadow from inner to outer shadowfrom impenetrable self to impenetrable unself by way of neitheras between two lit refuges whose doors once neared gently close, once turnedaway from gently part againbeckoned back and forth and turned awayheedless of the way, intent on the one gleam or the otherunheard footfalls only soundtill at last halt for good, absent for good from self and otherthen no soundthen gently light unfading on that unheeded neitherunspeakable homeAPPENDIX NOTES TO APPENDIX  See Mathijsen, Naar de letter, p. . It is relevant here to note Beckett’s own concern with the typographic appearance of his work. inhis preface to Dream Eoin O’Brien notes Beckett’s idiosyncratic use of line-spacing, spaces, in-dents, and punctuation (pp. xv–xvi). Dougald McMillan makes the same point: “His concern forthe visual extends to ... fonts of type ...” (in “Samuel Beckett and the Visual Arts: The Embarassmentof Allegory”, in On Beckett: Essays and Criticism, p. ). To Barney Rosset’s proposal for a designfor Waiting for Godot, Beckett replied with a ﬁrm “no to design you seem to like. ... [The varietyof symbols] make a hideous column and destroy the cohesion of the page.” (letter of  December, quoted in Review of Contemporary Fiction, Vol. , no  [Fall ], p. .) The case is well-documented by Gerry Dukes (lecture, Book and Publishing Studies Introduc-tion course, Leiden University, March ). Frederick N. Smith, too, mentions Beckett’s strug-gle to get the paragraphing of How It Is right (“Fiction as Composing Process: How It Is”, in SamuelBeckett: Humanistic Perspectives, ed. Morris Beja et al., pp. –). The original editions in French and English both have blank space between paragraphs. Latereditions, e.g. in CSProse – () and The Complete Short Prose – () haveindented paragraphs, but no blank space. See  s  and . See Vol. , Chapter , “Argument”. “Samuel Beckett and the Visual Arts: The Embarassment of Allegory”, in On Beckett: Essays andCriticism, ed. S.E. Gontarski, New York, , p. . See also S.E. Gontarski’s account of the textual history of neither in The Complete Short Prose, pp.–, from which some of the following information is derived. Sent by Beckett to Antoni Libera with a note dated Paris,  July . JOBS  (Autumn ), p. . See S.E. Gontarski’s introduction to The Complete Short Prose, p. xii. Letter dated  August , quoted by S.E. Gontarski, Complete Short Prose, p. xxxii. John Calder, “Preface”, As the Story Was Told, John Calder, London, and Riverrun Press, NewYork, , p. . Letter of  January  to the Dutch publisher, Van Stockum Belinfante & Coebergh. Geboorte werd hem zijn dood: Samuel Beckett (–), eds Adriaan van der Weel and RuudHisgen, The Hague, , p. . “Unheard Footfalls Only Sound: ‘neither’ in Translation”, in Samuel Beckett Today/Aujourd’hui,Vol. , Beckett in the s: Selected from the Second International Beckett Symposium, Held in TheHague, – April, , Amsterdam, , pp. –. Though neither is included in the prose section of Beckett at Reading: Catalogue of the BeckettManuscript Collection at the University of Reading by Mary Bryden et al. (Reading, ), it is de-scribed as a “sixteen-line text in English” (p. ), implying once again that the work is poetry.18 Beckett’s note to Feldman containing the text of neither is reproduced in facsimile in the pro-gramme notes for the production of neither by the Nederlandse Opera, which received its premierein January  (a photocopy of the note is held by Reading University Library:   ).The libretto follows this text faithfully. At a later date, however, Beckett appears to have changedVOLUME his mind about the reading of “once” in the third paragraph. RUL  , a photocopy of anundated typescript with the legend “Feldman text” in Beckett’s hand, has: “as between two litrefuges whose doors no sooner neared gently close, no sooner turned away from gently part again”(emphasis added). In view of the fact that in Beckett’s case typescripts almost invariably followmanuscripts (see also the discussion of the case of “Ceiling” on pp. ‒ above), it is likely that   represents a later state of the text. A  of neither sent by Beckett to Antoni Libera inJuly  confirms “no sooner” as a later reading. It may be noted, incidentally, that in his note toFeldman Beckett made use of the unambiguous device of dashes to separate his paragraphs.APPENDIX Appendix RUL MS  F. V[The transliteration of RUL MS  f. v below represents the text’s genesis without givinga separate surface text. Spacing on the page has been approximately preserved.]ashes [burning?]ashes burning more than allthe burning allto ashes-on whenceno sensebut xx onto whenceno sensebut back-? <y> [xxxx xx][xxx xxxx xxx].%to the nearest decimal deady [xxxx]Poetic <mis>calculation? indiﬀerent / contentfrom y to z.% [The  is circled, and “/” in the margin would seem to be meant to replace it.]to the dearest decimal deadincalescentin[x]<c>ipientincalescentfrom y toon whenceno sensebut onto whencebut onno senseso ontill whenceto whenceno sense[xx xxxx]VOLUME Fig. . Diagrams for Quad drawn on RUL MS  f. v.